Guide
Reporting on an Examination of Controls
at a Service Organization Relevant to
Security, Availability, Processing Integrity,
Confidentiality, or Privacy


SOC 2                         October 15, 2022
        ®
Guide
Reporting on an Examination of Controls
at a Service Organization Relevant to
Security, Availability, Processing Integrity,
Confidentiality, or Privacy


SOC 2                         October 15, 2022
        ®




                                       2202-61712
© 2022 Association of International Certified Professional Accountants. All rights
reserved. SOC 1®, SOC 2®, and SOC 3® trademarks are registered trademarks of the AICPA.
For information about the procedure for requesting permission to make copies of
any part of this work, please email Copyright-Permissions@aicpa-cima.com with your
request. Otherwise, requests should be written and mailed to Permissions Department, 220
Leigh Farm Road, Durham, NC 27707-8110 USA.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 AAP 2 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2
ISBN 978-1-95515-910-4
                                                                                          iii
Preface
                              (Updated as of October 15, 2022)


  About AICPA Guides
  This AICPA Guide, SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Ser-
  vice Organization Relevant to Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confi-
  dentiality, or Privacy, has been developed by members of the AICPA Assurance
  Services Executive Committee's (ASEC's) SOC 2 Working Group, in conjunc-
  tion with members of the Auditing Standards Board (ASB), to assist practi-
  tioners engaged to examine and report on a service organization's controls over
  its system relevant to security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality,
  or privacy.

  This AICPA Guide includes certain content presented as an "appendix." Ap-
  pendixes are included for informational purposes and have no authoritative
  status.

  An AICPA Guide containing attestation guidance is recognized as an interpre-
  tive publication as described in AT-C section 105, Concepts Common to All Attes-
  tation Engagements.1 Interpretative publications are recommendations on the
  application of Statements on Standards for Attestation Engagements (SSAEs)
  in specific circumstances, including engagements for entities in specialized in-
  dustries. Interpretive publications are issued under the authority of the ASB.
  The members of the ASB have found the attestation guidance in this guide to
  be consistent with existing SSAEs.

  A practitioner should consider the guidance in this guide in planning and per-
  forming an attestation engagement.

  Any attestation guidance in a guide appendix, although not authoritative, is
  considered an "other attestation publication." In applying such guidance, the
  practitioner should, exercising professional judgment, assess the relevance and
  appropriateness of such guidance to the circumstances of the engagement. Al-
  though the practitioner determines the relevance of other attestation guidance,
  such guidance in a guide appendix has been reviewed by the AICPA Audit and
  Attest Standards staff and the practitioner may presume that it is appropriate.

  The ASB is the designated senior committee of the AICPA authorized to speak
  for the AICPA on all matters related to attestation. Conforming changes made
  to the attestation guidance contained in this guide are approved by the ASB
  Chair (or a designee) and the director of the AICPA Audit and Attest Standards
  staff. Updates made to the attestation guidance in this guide exceeding that of
  conforming changes are issued after all ASB members have been provided an
  opportunity to consider and comment on whether the guide is consistent with
  the SSAEs.



     1   All AT-C sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.



  ©2022, AICPA                                                                 AAG-SOP
iv
     Recently Issued Attestation Standards

     SSAE No. 20, Amendments to the Description of the
     Concept of Materiality
     In December 2019, the ASB issued SSAE No. 20, Amendments to the Descrip-
     tion of the Concept of Materiality, which amends various AT-C sections to reflect
     a revised description of the concept of materiality. The ASB's current descrip-
     tion of the concept of materiality is consistent with the definition of materi-
     ality used by the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and the
     International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (IAASB). SSAE No. 20
     aligns the materiality concepts discussed in the attestation standards with the
     description of materiality used by the U.S. judicial system, the auditing stan-
     dards of the PCAOB, the SEC, and FASB. The ASB believes it is in the public
     interest to eliminate inconsistencies between the description of materiality in
     the attestation standards and the description of materiality used by the U.S. ju-
     dicial system and other U.S. standard setters and regulators. The ASB believes
     that, because the revised definition is aligned with FASB's definition, the re-
     vised description is substantially consistent with current U.S. firm practices
     with respect to determining and applying materiality in an attest engagement;
     accordingly, the amendments are neither expected nor intended to change U.S.
     practice. The revised description of materiality is as follows: Misstatements,
     including omissions, are considered to be material if there is a substantial like-
     lihood that, individually or in the aggregate, they would influence the judgment
     made by a reasonable user based on the financial statements.

     The SSAE is effective for periods ending, or for practitioners' examination or
     review reports dated, on or after December 15, 2020.

     SSAE No. 21, Direct Examination Engagements
     In October 2020, the ASB issued SSAE No. 21, Direct Examination Engage-
     ments, which among other things, adds a new AT-C section to the attestation
     standards, designated as AT-C section 206, Direct Examination Engagements.
     AT-C section 206 enables a practitioner to perform an examination engage-
     ment in which the practitioner obtains reasonable assurance by (1) measuring
     or evaluating underlying subject matter against criteria and (2) expressing an
     opinion that conveys the results of that measurement or evaluation.

     SSAE No. 21 also amends AT-C section 105 of SSAE No. 18 and supersedes
     AT-C section 205, Examination Engagements, of SSAE No. 18. Revisions to
     those standards were necessary to address both assertion-based and direct ex-
     amination engagements. Where applicable, those changes are reflected in this
     guide.

     SSAE No. 21 is effective for reports dated on or after June 15, 2022.

     As discussed in paragraph 1.17 of this guide, the SOC 2 examination discussed
     herein is an assertion-based examination. Accordingly, the service auditor per-
     forms the examination under AT-C section 205, which supplements the require-
     ments and guidance in AT-C section 105. Therefore, this guide does not address
     the requirements and guidance in AT-C section 206.

AAG-SOP                                                              ©2022, AICPA
                                                                                        v
Purpose and Applicability
This guide, SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Orga-
nization Relevant to Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality,
or Privacy, provides guidance to practitioners engaged to examine and report
on a service organization's controls over one or more of the following:

         • The security of a service organization's system
         • The availability of a service organization's system
         • The processing integrity of a service organization's system
         • The  confidentiality of the information that the service organiza-
           tion's system processes or maintains for user entities
         • The  privacy of personal information that the service organization
           collects, uses, retains, discloses, and disposes of for user entities

AT-C sections 105 and 205 establish the requirements and application guid-
ance for reporting on a service organization's controls over its system relevant
to security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, or privacy. Because
certain underlying circumstances of the subject matter addressed in this guide
are analogous to circumstances addressed in AT-C section 320, Reporting on an
Examination of Controls at a Service Organization Relevant to User Entities'
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting, requirements and application guid-
ance in that standard may be relevant when reporting on an entity's controls
over its system relevant to security, availability, processing integrity, confiden-
tiality, or privacy.
The attestation standards enable a practitioner to report on subject matter
other than historical financial statements. A practitioner may be engaged to ex-
amine and report on controls at a service organization related to various types
of subject matter (for example, controls that affect user entities' financial re-
porting or the privacy of information processed for user entities' customers).


Terms Used to Deﬁne Professional Responsibilities in
This AICPA Guide
Any requirements described in this guide are normally referenced to the ap-
plicable standards or regulations from which they are derived. Generally, the
terms used in this guide to describe the professional requirements of the refer-
enced standard setter (for example, the ASB) are the same as those used in the
applicable standards or regulations (for example, "must" or "should").
Readers should refer to the applicable standards and regulations for more in-
formation on the requirements imposed by the use of the various terms used
to define professional requirements in the context of the standards and regula-
tions in which they appear.


References to Professional Standards
In citing attestation standards and their related interpretations, references to
standards that have been codified use section numbers within the codification
of currently effective SSAEs and not the original statement number.

©2022, AICPA                                                                 AAG-SOP
vi
     Examinations of System and Organization Controls:
     SOC Suite of Services
     In 2017, the AICPA introduced the term system and organization controls
     (SOC) to refer to the suite of services practitioners may provide relating to
     system-level controls of a service organization or system- or entity-level con-
     trols of other organizations. Formerly, SOC referred to service organization con-
     trols. By redefining that acronym, the AICPA enables the introduction of new
     internal control examinations that may be performed (a) for other types of or-
     ganizations, in addition to service organizations, and (b) on either system-level
     or entity-level controls of such organizations. This guide, SOC 2® Reporting on
     Controls at a Service Organization Relevant to Security, Availability, Process-
     ing Integrity, Confidentiality, or Privacy, is an interpretation of AT-C sections
     105 and 205 that assists CPAs in reporting on the security, availability, or pro-
     cessing integrity of a system or the confidentiality or privacy of the information
     processed by the system. This engagement is referred to as SOC 2 — SOC for
     Service Organizations: Trust Services Criteria. Other SOC engagements in-
     clude the following:

             • SOC   1 — SOC for Service Organizations: ICFR. Service organiza-
               tions may provide services that are relevant to their user entities'
                  internal control over financial reporting and, therefore, to the au-
                  dit of financial statements. These examinations are performed un-
                  der AT-C section 320. The requirements and guidance for perform-
                  ing and reporting on such controls are provided in AT-C sections
                  105, 205, and 320. AICPA Guide Reporting on an Examination of
                  Controls at a Service Organization Relevant to User Entities' Inter-
                  nal Control Over Financial Reporting (SOC 1® ) provides relevant
                  interpretive guidance to assist practitioners in performing these
                  engagements.
             •    SOC 3 — SOC for Service Organizations: Trust Services Criteria
                  for General Use Report. Although the requirements and guidance
                  for performing a SOC 3 examination are similar to those for a SOC
                  2 examination, the reporting requirements are different. Because
                  of the different reporting requirements, a SOC 2 report is appro-
                  priate only for specified parties with sufficient knowledge and un-
                  derstanding of the service organization and the system, whereas
                  a SOC 3 report is ordinarily appropriate for general use.
             •    SOC for Cybersecurity. As part of an entity's cybersecurity risk
                  management program, an entity designs, implements, and op-
                  erates cybersecurity controls. An engagement to examine and
                  report on a description of the entity's cybersecurity risk man-
                  agement program and the effectiveness of controls within that
                  program is a cybersecurity risk management examination. The re-
                  quirements and guidance for performing and reporting in a cyber-
                  security risk management examination are provided in AT-C sec-
                  tions 105 and 205. Because certain underlying circumstances of
                  the subject matter addressed in a SOC for Cybersecurity engage-
                  ment are analogous to circumstances addressed in AT-C section
                  320, certain requirements and application guidance in that stan-
                  dard may be relevant when reporting on an entity's controls over
                  its cybersecurity risk management program and the effectiveness

AAG-SOP                                                              ©2022, AICPA
                                                                                          vii
                of controls within that program. AICPA Guide Reporting on an
                Entity's Cybersecurity Risk Management Program and Controls
                provides interpretive guidance for the relevant attestation stan-
                dards to assist practitioners engaged to examine and report on the
                description of an entity's cybersecurity risk management program
                and the effectiveness of controls within that program.
          •     SOC for Supply Chain. Internal and external forces such as glob-
                alization, global interconnectivity, automation, and other techno-
                logical advancements are making today's supply chains highly
                sophisticated and complex. For entities that produce, manu-
                facture, or distribute products, there's often a high level of
                interdependence and connectivity between them and their sup-
                pliers and their customers and business partners. A SOC for Sup-
                ply Chain examination helps these organizations, and their cus-
                tomers and business partners, identify, assess, and address supply
                chain risks. The performance and reporting requirements for an
                examination of an entity's controls over a system that produces,
                manufactures, or distributes products are found in AT-C sections
                105 and 205. Because certain underlying circumstances of the sub-
                ject matter addressed in a SOC for Supply Chain engagement are
                analogous to circumstances addressed in AT-C section 320, certain
                requirements and application guidance in that standard may be
                relevant when reporting on an entity's controls over its system rel-
                evant to security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality,
                or privacy. AICPA Guide Reporting on an Examination of Controls
                Relevant to Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confiden-
                tiality, or Privacy in a Production, Manufacturing, or Distribution
                System (SOC for Supply Chain) contains application guidance for
                practitioners.
This guide focuses on SOC 2 engagements. To make practitioners aware of the
various professional standards and guides available to them for examining and
reporting on system-level controls at a service organization and entity-level
controls at other organizations, and to help practitioners select the appropri-
ate standard or guide for a particular engagement, appendix A, "Comparison of
SOC 1, SOC 2, and SOC 3 Examinations and Related Reports," includes a table
that compares the features of the three engagements. Additionally, appendix
B, "Comparison of SOC 2, SOC for Supply Chain, and SOC for Cybersecurity
Examinations and Related Reports," compares the features of a SOC 2 exami-
nation and a cybersecurity risk management examination.


Description Criteria for a Description of a Service
Organization’s System in a SOC 2 Report
In February 2018, ASEC issued revised description criteria for a description of
a service organization's system in a SOC 2 report, which are codified in DC sec-
tion 200, 2018 Description Criteria for a Description of a Service Organization's
System in a SOC 2 Report (With Revised Implementation Guidance — 2022),
(2018 description criteria).2 The 2018 description criteria were established by


   2   All DC sections can be found in AICPA Description Criteria.


©2022, AICPA                                                                   AAG-SOP
viii
       ASEC for use by service organization management when preparing the descrip-
       tion of the service organization's system and by service auditors when evalu-
       ating whether the description is presented in accordance with the description
       criteria in a SOC 2 examination.
       The current version of the 2018 description criteria has been modified to reflect
       revisions to the implementation guidance relevant to certain of the description
       criteria. The implementation guidance presents factors to consider when mak-
       ing judgments about the nature and extent of disclosures called for by each cri-
       terion. As such, it may assist management when developing disclosures. In ad-
       dition, the points of focus may assist the practitioner when evaluating whether
       the description is fairly presented.
       The revisions to the implementation guidance do not in any way alter the crite-
       ria in the 2018 description criteria. Such criteria continue to be suitable criteria
       for use when evaluating the description of a system in a SOC 2 engagement.
       Revisions to the implementation guidance were developed by ASEC's SOC 2
       Working Group; all revisions were reviewed by the ASEC chair. The revised
       implementation guidance is intended to provide users of the criteria with

                 • additional clarity regarding certain disclosure requirements.
                 • guidance  on disclosure of how controls meet the requirements of
                   a process or control framework.
                 • guidance  on disclosure of information about the risk assessment
                   process and specific risks.
       In establishing and developing these criteria, ASEC followed due process proce-
       dures, including exposure of criteria for public comment. BL section 360R, Im-
       plementing Resolutions Under Section 3.6 Committees,3 designates ASEC as a
       senior technical committee with the authority to make public statements with-
       out clearance from the AICPA Council or the board of directors. Paragraph .A46
       of AT-C section 105 indicates that criteria promulgated by a body designated by
       the Council of the AICPA under the AICPA Code of Professional Conduct are, by
       definition, considered suitable. Accordingly, these criteria are suitable criteria
       for preparing and evaluating a description of a system in a SOC 2 examination.
       ASEC has also published the description criteria and made them available to
       users. Therefore, the description criteria meet the requirements in paragraph
       .27bii of AT-C section 105 for criteria that are both suitable and available for
       use in an attestation engagement.


       Trust Services Criteria
       Codified as TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Avail-
       ability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy (With Revised Points
       of Focus — 2022) (2017 trust services criteria),4 the trust services criteria were
       established by ASEC for use by practitioners when providing attestation or
       consulting services to evaluate controls relevant to the security, availability, or
       processing integrity of one or more systems, or the confidentiality or privacy of


          3   All BL sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.
          4   All TSP sections can be found in AICPA Trust Services Criteria.



AAG-SOP                                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                                                                                          ix
information processed by one or more systems, used by an entity. Entity man-
agement may also use the trust services criteria to evaluate the suitability of
design and operating effectiveness of such controls.
The current version of the 2017 trust services criteria has been modified to re-
flect new points of focus and edits to extant points of focus (collectively referred
to as "revisions") relevant to certain of the trust services criteria. Points of fo-
cus represent important characteristics of the criteria. As such, they may assist
management when designing, implementing, and operating controls over secu-
rity, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, or privacy. In addition, the
points of focus may assist both management and the practitioner when they are
evaluating whether controls were suitably designed and operated effectively to
achieve the entity's objectives based on the trust services criteria.
The revisions to the points of focus do not in any way alter the criteria in the
2017 trust services criteria. Such criteria continue to be suitable criteria for use
when evaluating controls in any trust services engagement.
Revisions to the points of focus were developed by ASEC's SOC 2 Working
Group and ASEC's Data Privacy Working Group; all revisions were reviewed
by the ASEC chair. The revised points of focus in this version are intended to
better support application of the criteria in

         • an environment of ever-changing technologies, threats and vulner-
           abilities, and other matters that may create additional security
              risks to organizations.
         •    addressing changing legal and regulatory requirements and re-
              lated cultural expectations regarding privacy.
         •    addressing data management requirements (for example, data
              storage, backup, and retention), particularly when related to con-
              fidentiality.
         •    differentiating which points of focus related to privacy may ap-
              ply only to an organization that is a data controller and which
              may apply only to an organization that is a data processor, as de-
              fined in the glossary. (Although this distinction is intended to as-
              sist management and the service auditor in identifying situations
              in which certain points of focus may be particularly relevant, the
              specific facts and circumstances of the organization's operations
              are relevant when identifying and applying points of focus in a
              trust services engagement.)

In establishing and developing these criteria, ASEC followed due process pro-
cedures, including exposure of criteria for public comment. BL section 360R
designates ASEC as a senior technical committee with the authority to make
public statements without clearance from the AICPA Council or the board of di-
rectors. Paragraph .A46 of AT-C section 105 indicates that criteria promulgated
by a body designated by the Council of the AICPA under the AICPA Code of
Professional Conduct are, by definition, considered suitable. Accordingly, these
criteria are suitable criteria for evaluating controls in a SOC 2 examination.
ASEC has also published the trust services criteria and made them available
to users. Therefore, the trust services criteria meet the requirements in para-
graph .27bii of AT-C section 105 for criteria that are both suitable and available
for use in an attestation engagement.


©2022, AICPA                                                                   AAG-SOP
x
    Applicability of Quality Control Standards
    QM section 10A, A Firm's System of Quality Control,5 addresses a CPA firm's
    responsibilities for its system of quality control for its accounting and audit-
    ing practice. A system of quality control consists of policies that a firm estab-
    lishes and maintains to provide it with reasonable assurance that the firm
    and its personnel comply with professional standards, as well as applicable
    legal and regulatory requirements. The policies also provide the firm with
    reasonable assurance that reports issued by the firm are appropriate in the
    circumstances.
    QM section 10A applies to all CPA firms with respect to engagements in their
    accounting and auditing practice. In paragraph .13 of QM section 10A, an ac-
    counting and auditing practice is defined as
             [a] practice that performs engagements covered by this section, which
             are audit, attestation, compilation, review, and any other services
             for which standards have been promulgated by the AICPA Auditing
             Standards Board (ASB) or the AICPA Accounting and Review Ser-
             vices Committee (ARSC) under the "General Standards Rule" (ET
             sec. 1.300.001)[6] or the "Compliance With Standards Rule" (ET sec.
             1.310.001) of the AICPA Code of Professional Conduct. Although stan-
             dards for other engagements may be promulgated by other AICPA
             technical committees, engagements performed in accordance with
             those standards are not encompassed in the definition of an accounting
             and auditing practice.
    In addition to the provisions of QM section 10A, readers should be aware
    of other sections within AICPA Professional Standards that address qual-
    ity control considerations, including the following provisions that address
    engagement-level quality control matters for various types of engagements that
    an accounting and auditing practice might perform:

             • AU-C  section 220A, Quality Control for an Engagement Conducted
               in Accordance With Generally Accepted Auditing Standards           7


             • AT-C
               ments
                     section 105, Concepts Common to All Attestation Engage-

             • AR-C  section 60A, General Principles for Engagements Performed
               in Accordance With Statements on Standards for Accounting and
                  Review Services8

    See the AICPA practice aid Establishing and Maintaining a System of Quality
    Control for a CPA Firm's Accounting and Auditing Practice, available at
    https://us.aicpa.org/interestareas/frc/enhancingauditqualitypracticeaid.html
    for guidance about the key aspects of the quality control standards currently
    in effect.



       5 All QM sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.
       [6]All ET sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.
       7 All AU-C sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.

       8 All AR-C sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.




AAG-SOP                                                                    ©2022, AICPA
                                                                                  xi

Recent Developments in the Quality Management Standards
On June 2, 2022, the ASB issued Statement on Quality Management Stan-
dards (SQMS) No. 1, A Firm's System of Quality Management, codified as QM
section 10. Systems of quality management in compliance with SQMS No. 1
are required to be designed and implemented by December 15, 2025, and the
evaluation of the system of quality management required by SQMS No. 1 is
required to be performed within one year following December 15, 2025.
QM section 10 addresses a CPA firm's responsibilities for its system of qual-
ity management for its accounting and auditing practice. The objective of a
system of quality management is to provide the firm with reasonable assur-
ance that the firm and its personnel comply with professional standards, as
well as applicable legal and regulatory requirements. The system also pro-
vides the firm with reasonable assurance that reports issued by the firm are
appropriate in the circumstances. The firm designs, implements, and oper-
ates the system by establishing quality objectives, identifying and assessing
risks to the achievement of the quality objectives, and designing and imple-
menting responses, consisting of policies or procedures, to address the quality
risks.
QM section 10 applies to all CPA firms with respect to engagements in their
accounting and auditing practice. In paragraph .17 of QM section 10, an ac-
counting and auditing practice is defined as a
        practice that performs engagements covered by this section, which
        are audit, attestation, review, compilation, and any other services
        for which standards have been promulgated by the AICPA Auditing
        Standards Board (ASB) or the AICPA Accounting and Review Ser-
        vices Committee (ARSC) under the "General Standards Rule" (ET
        sec. 1.300.001) or the "Compliance With Standards Rule" (ET sec.
        1.310.001) of the AICPA code.
A firm's accounting and auditing practice comprises engagements performed
under the following standards promulgated by the ASB and ARSC:

       • Statements on Auditing Standards (SASs)
       • Statements on Standards for Attestation Engagements (SSAEs)
       • Statements
         (SSARSs)
                    on Standards for Accounting and Review Services


Although standards for other engagements may be promulgated by other
AICPA technical committees, engagements performed in accordance with
those other standards are not encompassed in the definition of an account-
ing and auditing practice.
Readers should be aware of other sections within AICPA Professional
Standards that address quality management considerations, including the
following:

       • QM section 20, Engagement Quality Reviews
       • AU-C  section 220, Quality Management for an Engagement Con-
         ducted in Accordance With Generally Accepted Auditing Stan-
            dards



©2022, AICPA                                                            AAG-SOP
xii

             • AT-C
               ments
                     section 105, Concepts Common to All Attestation Engage-

             • AR-C  section 60, General Principles for Engagements Performed
               in Accordance With Statements on Standards for Accounting and
                 Review Services
      Because of the importance of engagement quality, this guide includes ap-
      pendix I, "Overview of Statements on Quality Management Standards," which
      summarizes key aspects of the quality management standards. This summa-
      rization should be read in conjunction with QM section 10, QM section 20,
      AU-C section 220, AT-C section 105, and AR-C section 60, as applicable.


      Recognition
                     Auditing Standards Board (2021–2022)

                              Tracy W. Harding, Chair
                                   Brad C. Ames
                                 Maxene Bardwell
                                Samantha Bowling
                                 Patricia Bottomly
                                  Sherry Chesser
                                   Harry Cohen
                                    Jeanne Dee
                                   Horace Emery
                                  Diane Hardesty
                                   Robert Harris
                                Kathleen K. Healy
                                     Jon Heath
                                   Clay Huffman
                                   Greg Jenkins
                                     Sara Lord
                                Maria C. Manasses
                                  Andrew Prather
                                   Chris Rogers
                               Tania Desilva Sergott

             Assurance Services Executive Committee (2021–2022)

                                Jim Burton, Chair
                                 Damon T. Busse
                               Daniel Richard Balla
                              Mary Grace Davenport
                                   Jim Dalkin
                                 Chris Halterman
                                   Dyan Rohol
                              Catherine M. Schweigel
                                   Amy Steele
                              Kimberly Ellison-Taylor
                                  Steve Ursillo
                                Miklos Vasarhelyi



AAG-SOP                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                                                          xiii
                  ASEC SOC 2 Working Group

                     Chris Halterman, Chair
                         Angela Appleby
                           David Barnes
                           Efrim Boritz
                         Brandon Brown
                             Jeff Cook
                         Charles Curran
                          Joel Eshleman
                          Meghan Hester
                         Peter F. Heuzey
                         Audrey Katcher
                           Kevin Knight
                     Christopher W. Kradjan
                    Brandon Miller (Observer)
                        Thomas Patterson
                          Binita Pradhan
                         John Richardson
                           Don Sheehy
                           Soma Sinha
                            Rod Smith
                     Steve Ursillo (Observer)
                            David Wood

                           AICPA Staff

                          Jennifer Burns
                           Chief Auditor
                Professional Standards and Services

                          Amy Pawlicki
                          Vice President
                Assurance and Advisory Innovation

                         Mimi Blanco-Best
                         Associate Director
               Attestation Methodology and Guidance

                        Carrie Kostelec
                        Lead Manager
                     SOC & Related Services

                           Anna Miller
                  Technical Publishing Manager
                            Publishing




©2022, AICPA                                          AAG-SOP
                                  Introduction and Background                                             1
Chapter 1
  Introduction and Background
   This chapter explains the relationship between a service organization and
   its user entities; provides examples of service organizations and the services
   they may provide; explains the relationship between those services and the
   system used to provide them; describes the components of a system and its
   boundaries; identifies the criteria used to evaluate a description of a service
   organization's system (description criteria) and the criteria used to evaluate
   whether controls were suitably designed and operated effectively to provide
   reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commitments
   and system requirements were achieved (applicable trust services criteria);
   and explains the difference between a type 1 SOC 2 report and type 2 SOC
   2 report.1 It also describes the relationship between a service organization
   and its business partners and the effect of a service organization's system on
   those business partners. In addition, this chapter provides an overview of a
   SOC 3® examination and other SOC services.


  Introduction
       1.01 Entities often use business relationships with other entities to fur-
  ther their objectives. Network-based information technology has enabled, and
  telecommunications systems have substantially increased, the economic ben-
  efits derived from these relationships. For example, some entities (user enti-
  ties) are able to function more efficiently and effectively by outsourcing tasks
  or entire functions to another organization (service organization). A service or-
  ganization is organized and operated to provide user entities with the benefits
  of the services of its personnel, expertise, equipment, and technology to help
  accomplish these tasks or functions. Other entities (business partners) enter
  into agreements with a service organization that enable the service organiza-
  tion to offer the business partners' services or assets (for example, intellectual
  property) to the service organization's customers. In such instances, business
  partners may want to understand the effectiveness of controls implemented by
  the service organization to protect the business partners' intellectual property.
      1.02 Examples of the types of services provided by service organizations
  include the following:

            • Customer  support. Providing user entities with online or tele-
              phonic post-sales support and service management for their cus-
                  tomers. Examples of these services are warranty inquiries and in-
                  vestigating and responding to customer complaints.
            •     Health care claims management and processing. Providing medi-
                  cal providers, employers, third-party administrators, and insured
                  parties of employers with systems that enable medical records
                  and related health insurance claims to be processed accurately,
                  securely, and confidentially.


       1 Throughout this guide, these SOC 2 reports and the related examinations are referred to simply

  as type 1 and type 2 reports and examinations.


  ©2022, AICPA                                                                        AAG-SOP 1.02
2       SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

               • Enterprise information technology (IT) outsourcing services.
                 Managing, operating, and maintaining user entities' IT data
                     centers, infrastructure, and application systems and related
                     functions that support IT activities, such as network, production,
                     security, change management, hardware, and environmental con-
                     trol activities.
               •     eCommerce software-as-a-service (SaaS) application. Providing
                     user entities with shopping cart software, allowing businesses to
                     create an online shop within minutes without coding, hosting, or
                     software.
               •     Managed security. Managing access to networks and computing
                     systems for user entities (for example, granting access to a system
                     and preventing, or detecting and mitigating, system intrusion).
               •     Financial technology services. Providing financial services com-
                     panies with IT-based transaction processing services. Examples
                     of such transactions are loan processing, peer-to-peer lending,
                     payment processing, retirement recordkeeping, crowdfunding, big
                     data analytics, and investment management.
               •     Environmental, social, and governance (ESG) metric services.
                     Measuring, calculating, and otherwise assisting companies with
                     gathering and reporting their ESG metrics.
         1.03 Although these relationships may increase revenue, expand market
    opportunities, reduce costs for the user entities and business partners, and
    mitigate certain business risks, they also result in new risks arising from in-
    teractions with the service organization and its system. Accordingly, the man-
    agement of user entities and business partners are responsible for identifying,
    evaluating, and addressing those additional risks as part of their risk assess-
    ment. In addition, although management can delegate responsibility for specific
    tasks or functions to a service organization, management remains accountable
    for those tasks to boards of directors, shareholders, regulators, customers, and
    other affected parties. As a result, management is responsible for establishing
    effective internal control over interactions between the service organizations
    and their systems.
        1.04 To identify, assess and address the risks associated with a service
    organization, its services, and the system used to provide the services, user
    entities and business partners usually need information about the design, op-
    eration, and effectiveness of controls2 within the system. To support their risk
    assessments, user entities and business partners may request a SOC 2 report
    from the service organization. A SOC 2 service auditor's report is the culmi-
    nation of an independent service auditor's3 examination of whether (a) the de-
    scription of the service organization's system presents the system that was

          2 In this guide, controls are policies and procedures that are part of the service organization's

    system of internal control. Controls exist within each of the five internal control components of the
    Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission's 2013 Internal Control — In-
    tegrated Framework: control environment, risk assessment, control activities, information and com-
    munication, and monitoring. The objective of a service organization's system of internal control is to
    provide reasonable assurance that its service commitments and system requirements are achieved.
    When this guide refers to "controls that provide reasonable assurance," it means the controls that
    make up the system of internal control.
          3 The attestation standards refer to a CPA who performs an attestation engagement as a prac-

    titioner. However, this guide uses the term service auditor to refer to the practitioner in a SOC 2
    examination.


AAG-SOP 1.03                                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                                  Introduction and Background                                                 3
designed and implemented in accordance with the description criteria; (b) the
controls stated in the description were suitably designed to provide reasonable
assurance that the service organization's service commitments and system re-
quirements were achieved based on the criteria, if those controls operated ef-
fectively; and (c) in a type 2 examination, the controls stated in the description
operated effectively to provide reasonable assurance that the service organi-
zation's service commitments and system requirements were achieved based
on the criteria relevant to the security, availability, or processing integrity of
the service organization's system (security, availability, processing integrity) or
based on the criteria relevant to the system's ability to maintain the confiden-
tiality or privacy of the information processed for user entities (confidentiality
or privacy).4,5 This examination, which is referred to as a SOC 2 examination,
is the subject of this guide.
    1.05 As illustrated in table 1-1, there are two types of SOC 2 examinations
that address the informational needs of users:
           a. A type 1 examination is an examination of whether
                    i. a service organization's description presents the system
                       that was designed and implemented as of a point in time
                       in accordance with the description criteria and
                   ii. controls were suitably designed as of a point in time to
                       provide reasonable assurance that the service organiza-
                       tion's service commitments and system requirements were
                       achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria, if
                       controls operated effectively.
              A report on such an examination is referred to as a type 1 report.
           b. A type 2 examination also addresses the description of the system
              and the suitability of design of controls, but it includes an additional
              subject matter: whether controls operated effectively throughout
              the period of time to provide reasonable assurance that the service
              organization's service commitments and system requirements were
              achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria. A report on
              such an examination is referred to as a type 2 report. A type 2 report
              also includes a detailed description of the service auditor's tests of
              controls and the results of those tests.
    1.06 A service auditor may be engaged to perform either a type 1 or a type
2 examination. A service auditor may not be engaged to examine and express
an opinion on only the suitability of design of some controls and both the design
and operating effectiveness of other controls in a SOC 2 examination.


Intended Users of a SOC 2 Report
    1.07 A SOC 2 report, whether a type 1 or a type 2 report, is intended to
provide report users with information about the service organization's system


     4 As discussed in footnote 1, controls can only provide reasonable assurance that an organiza-

tion's objectives are achieved. In a SOC 2 examination, the service organization designs, implements,
and operates controls to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commit-
ments and system requirements are achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.
     5 A SOC 2 examination may be performed on any of the trust services categories (security, avail-

ability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy). Use of the trust services criteria in a SOC 2
examination is discussed beginning in paragraph 1.44.


©2022, AICPA                                                                             AAG-SOP 1.07
4       SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

    relevant to security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, or privacy
    to enable such users to assess and address the risks that arise from their rela-
    tionships with the service organization. The report is also intended to provide
    report users with information about the system that may be useful when as-
    sessing the risks arising from interactions with the service organization's sys-
    tem, particularly system controls that the service organization has designed,
    implemented, and operated to provide reasonable assurance that its service
    commitments and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable
    trust services criteria. For example, disclosures about the types of services pro-
    vided, the environment in which the entity operates, and the components of the
    system used to provide such services allow report users to better understand
    the context in which the system controls operate.
        1.08 A SOC 2 report is intended for use by those who have sufficient knowl-
    edge and understanding of the service organization, the services it provides,
    and the system used to provide those services, among other matters. The ex-
    pected knowledge of specified parties ordinarily includes the following:
              • The nature of the service provided by the service organization
              • How  the service organization's system interacts with user entities,
                                                                             6
                business partners, subservice organizations, and other parties
              • Internal control and its limitations
              • Complementary     user entity controls and complementary subser-
                vice organization controls and how those controls interact with
                    the controls at the service organization to achieve the service or-
                    ganization's service commitments and system requirements
              •     User entity responsibilities and how they may affect the user en-
                    tities' ability to effectively use the service organization's services
              •     The applicable trust services criteria
              •     The risks that may threaten the achievement of the service or-
                    ganization's service commitments and system requirements, and
                    how controls address those risks
         1.09 Without such knowledge, users are likely to misunderstand the con-
    tent of the SOC 2 report, the assertions made by management, and the service
    auditor's opinion, all of which are included in the report. For that reason, a SOC
    2 report, as discussed in this guide, is restricted to use by users with that knowl-
    edge. Restricting the use of a service auditor's report in a SOC 2 examination
    is discussed beginning in paragraph 4.36.
        1.10 In a SOC 2 report, the following intended users are presumed to have
    the knowledge identified in paragraph 1.08:
              a. User entities of the system throughout some or all of the period. User
                 entities need information about the service organization's system,
                 including the nature and effectiveness of controls within that sys-
                 tem, to understand the service organization's controls and to deter-
                 mine whether those controls, in addition to their own controls, are
                 sufficient to mitigate their business risks.

         6 If a service organization uses a subservice organization, the description of the service orga-

    nization's system may either (a) include the subservice organization's functions or services and re-
    lated controls (inclusive method) or (b) exclude the subservice organization's functions or services
    and related controls (carve-out method). Chapter 2, "Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination,"
    discusses the two methods for treating subservice organizations.


AAG-SOP 1.08                                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                           Introduction and Background                                   5
         b. Business partners subject to risks arising from interactions with the
            system. Business partners may include affiliated organizations that
            are user entities, vendors, or subservice organizations of the service
            organization. Business partners need information about the service
            organization's system and the controls within that system to man-
            age and assess the risks associated with doing business with the
            service organization.

    1.11 In some situations, federal or state governmental agencies, industry
consortiums, or groups of subject matter experts who need information about
a specific subject matter (for example, security controls over sensitive informa-
tion) from their members or other entities with whom they do business may
also be intended users.

     1.12 Intended users may also include service organization personnel, prac-
titioners providing services to the entity's customers and business partners,
and regulators who have the knowledge and understanding discussed in para-
graph 1.08.

     1.13 Parties other than those identified in paragraphs 1.10–1.12 may also
have the requisite knowledge and understanding identified in paragraph 1.08.
For example, prospective user entities or business partners, who intend to use
the information contained in the SOC 2 report as part of their vendor-selection
process or to comply with regulatory requirements for vendor acceptance, may
have gained such knowledge while performing due diligence. Additionally, a
user entity of a service organization's subservice organization (an indirect or
downstream user entity) may be included in the group to whom use of the ser-
vice auditor's report is restricted. An organization that is considered an indirect
user entity ordinarily would not have a contract with the subservice organiza-
tion, but would have a contract with the primary service organization.

    1.14 As previously discussed, the SOC 2 report has been designed to meet
the common information needs of the broad range of intended users described
in the preceding paragraphs. However, nothing precludes the service auditor
from restricting the use of the service auditor's report to a smaller group of
users.

    1.15 In some situations, service organization management may wish to
distribute a report on the service organization's controls relevant to security,
availability, confidentiality, processing integrity, or privacy to users who lack
the knowledge and understanding described in paragraph 1.08. In that case,
management may engage a service auditor to examine and express an opinion
on the effectiveness of controls within a service organization's system in a SOC
3 examination. As discussed beginning at paragraph 1.73, a SOC 3 report is
ordinarily appropriate for general users. Chapter 4, "Forming the Opinion and
Preparing the Service Auditor's Report," discusses the reporting elements of a
SOC 3 report in further detail.


Overview of a SOC 2 Examination
     1.16 As previously discussed, a SOC 2 examination is an examination of a
service organization's description of its system, the suitability of the design of
its controls, and in a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness of controls
relevant to security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, or privacy.

©2022, AICPA                                                            AAG-SOP 1.16
6       SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

    This guide provides performance and reporting guidance for both types of SOC
    2 examinations.
        1.17 The SOC 2 examination discussed in this guide is an assertion-based
    examination. Accordingly, the service auditor performs the examination under
    AT-C section 205, Assertion-Based Examination Engagements, which supple-
    ments the requirements and guidance in AT-C section 105, Concepts Common
    to All Attestation Engagements.7 Therefore, this guide does not address the
    requirements and guidance in AT-C section 206, Direct Examination Engage-
    ments.
         1.18 In a SOC 2 examination, service organization management is the
    responsible party. However, in certain situations there may be other respon-
    sible parties.8 As the responsible party, service organization management pre-
    pares the description of the service organization's system that is included in the
    SOC 2 report.
         1.19 The service auditor should request a written assertion from
    management.9 Management's written assertion, which is also included in the
    SOC 2 report, addresses whether (a) the description of the service organiza-
    tion's system is presented in accordance with the description criteria, (b) the
    controls stated in the description were suitably designed to provide reasonable
    assurance that the service organization's service commitments and system re-
    quirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria, and (c)
    in a type 2 examination, those controls were operating effectively to provide rea-
    sonable assurance that the service organization's service commitments and sys-
    tem requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.
         1.20 The service auditor designs and performs procedures to obtain suffi-
    cient appropriate evidence about whether the description presents the system
    that was designed and implemented in accordance with the description criteria
    and whether (a) the controls stated in the description were suitably designed
    to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commit-
    ments and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust
    services criteria and, (b) in a type 2 examination, those controls were operat-
    ing effectively to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's
    service commitments and system requirements were achieved based on the ap-
    plicable trust services criteria. In a type 2 examination, the service auditor also
    presents, in a separate section of the SOC 2 report, a description of the service
    auditor's tests of controls and the results thereof.


    Contents of the SOC 2 Report
        1.21 A SOC 2 examination results in the issuance of a SOC 2 report. As
    shown in table 1-1, the SOC 2 report includes three key components (four in a
    type 2 examination):


        7   All AT-C sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.
        8   If the service organization uses one or more subservice organizations and elects to use the in-
    clusive method for preparing the description, subservice organization management is also a responsi-
    ble party. Management's and the service auditor's responsibilities when the service organization uses
    one or more subservice organizations and elects to use the inclusive method are discussed further in
    chapter 2.
         9 See paragraph .10 of AT-C section 205, Assertion-Based Examination Engagements.




AAG-SOP 1.17                                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                        Introduction and Background                            7
Table 1-1
                      Contents of a SOC 2 Report

            Type 1 Report                        Type 2 Report
1. Management's description of the   1. Management's description of the
   system as of a point in time in      system throughout a period of
   accordance with the description      time in accordance with the
   criteria                             description criteria
2. Management assertion that          2. Management assertion that
   addresses whether                     addresses whether
    a. the description of the service     a. the description of the service
       organization's system as of a         organization's system
       point in time is presented in         throughout a period of time is
       accordance with the                   presented in accordance with
       description criteria and              the description criteria,
    b. the controls stated in the         b. the controls stated in the
       description were suitably             description were suitably
       designed as of a point in time        designed throughout a period
       to provide reasonable                 of time to provide reasonable
       assurance that the service            assurance that the service
       organization's service                organization's service
       commitments and system                commitments and system
       requirements were achieved            requirements were achieved
       based on the applicable trust         based on the applicable trust
       services criteria                     services criteria, and
                                          c. the controls stated in the
                                             description operated
                                             effectively throughout a
                                             period of time to provide
                                             reasonable assurance that
                                             the service organization's
                                             service commitments and
                                             system requirements were
                                             achieved based on the
                                             applicable trust services
                                             criteria
3. The service auditor's opinion      3. The service auditor's opinion
   about whether                         about whether
    a. the description of the service     a. the description of the service
       organization's system as of a         organization's system
       point in time is presented in         throughout a period of time is
       accordance with the                   presented in accordance with
       description criteria and              the description criteria,

                                                                 (continued)




©2022, AICPA                                                   AAG-SOP 1.21
8      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                    Contents of a SOC 2 Report — continued

                Type 1 Report                            Type 2 Report
         b. the controls stated in the           b. the controls stated in the
            description were suitably               description were suitably
            designed as of a point in time          designed throughout a period
            to provide reasonable                   of time to provide reasonable
            assurance that the service              assurance that the service
            organization's service                  organization's service
            commitments and system                  commitments and system
            requirements were achieved              requirements were achieved
            based on the applicable trust           based on the applicable trust
            services criteria                       services criteria, and
                                                 c. the controls stated in the
                                                    description operated
                                                    effectively throughout a
                                                    period of time to provide
                                                    reasonable assurance that
                                                    the service organization's
                                                    service commitments and
                                                    system requirements were
                                                    achieved based on the
                                                    applicable trust services
                                                    criteria
                                             4. Description of the service
                                                auditor's tests of controls and
                                                results thereof

    Deﬁnition of a System
        1.22 Service organization management is responsible for identifying the
    specific subject matter to be examined, including the components of the system
    used to provide the service and the boundaries of that system. Service organiza-
    tion management is also responsible for establishing its service commitments
    and system requirements and selecting the trust services category or categories
    to be addressed by the examination, as well as for selecting the period of time
    to be addressed. The following paragraphs provide a brief overview of each of
    these factors and how they might affect the subject matter of the engagement.
         1.23 In the SOC 2 examination, a system includes the infrastructure, soft-
    ware, procedures, and data that are designed, implemented, and operated by
    people to achieve one or more of the organization's specific business objectives
    (for example, delivery of services or production of goods) in accordance with
    management-specified requirements.
        1.24 System components can be classified into the following five cate-
    gories:

            • Infrastructure. The collection of physical or virtual resources that
              supports an overall IT environment, including the physical envi-
                 ronment and related structures, IT, and hardware (for example,
                 facilities, servers, storage, environmental monitoring equipment,
                 data storage devices and media, mobile devices, and internal

AAG-SOP 1.22                                                        ©2022, AICPA
                          Introduction and Background                                 9
             networks and connected external telecommunications networks)
             that the service organization uses to provide the services
         •   Software. The application programs and IT system software that
             support application programs (operating systems, middleware,
             and utilities), the types of databases used, the nature of external-
             facing web applications, and the nature of applications developed
             in-house, including details about whether the applications in use
             are mobile applications or desktop or laptop applications
         • People. The personnel involved in the governance, management,
           operation, security, and use of a system (business unit person-
             nel, developers, operators, user entity personnel, vendor person-
             nel, and managers)
         • Data. The types of data used by the system, such as transaction
           streams, files, databases, tables, and other outputs used or pro-
             cessed by the system
         • Procedures. The automated and manual procedures related to the
           services provided, including, as appropriate, procedures by which
             service activities are initiated, authorized, performed, and deliv-
             ered, and reports and other information are prepared

Boundaries of the System
     1.25 The boundaries of a system addressed by a SOC 2 examination need
to be clearly understood, defined, and communicated to report users. For exam-
ple, a financial reporting system is likely to be bounded by the components of
the system related to financial transaction initiation, authorization, recording,
processing, and reporting. The boundaries of a system related to processing in-
tegrity (system processing is complete, accurate, timely, and authorized), how-
ever, may extend to other operations (for example, risk management, internal
audit, information technology, or customer call center processes).
    1.26 If management has determined that functions or processes related to
the system are outside of the boundaries of the system identified as the subject
matter of the examination, there may be a risk that intended users think those
functions or processes were examined as part of the SOC 2 examination. In that
case, the description needs to clarify which processes or functions are within the
scope of the examination and which are not.
     1.27 In a SOC 2 examination that addresses the security, availability, or
processing integrity criteria, the system boundaries would cover, at a mini-
mum, all the system components as they relate to the transaction processing or
service life cycle, including initiation, authorization, processing, recording, and
reporting of the transactions processed for or services provided to user enti-
ties. The system boundaries would not include instances in which transaction-
processing information is combined with other information for secondary pur-
poses internal to the service organization, such as customer metrics tracking.
     1.28 It is becoming increasingly common for service organizations to use
information provided by third-party software applications or tools, whether in-
stalled on the premises or through software as a service, to perform certain
internal control activities relevant to the system being examined. For exam-
ple, tools may assist management in the identification or detection of threats
and vulnerabilities (such as firewalls, intrusion-prevention systems [IPSs],

©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP 1.28
10      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     intrusion-detection systems [IDSs], and security information and event man-
     agement systems [SIEMs]); monitoring the implementation of key software set-
     tings; or monitoring the effectiveness of automated controls. Such tools would
     be considered within the boundaries of the system when they support the ser-
     vice organization in achieving its service commitments and system require-
     ments. The processing performed by these tools is designed to be consistent, but
     is highly dependent on other factors such as whether the ability to change con-
     figuration settings is appropriately restricted and whether changes are made
     in accordance with the change management process. It is important that the
     service auditor consider the information produced by such tools when evalu-
     ating the appropriateness of the boundaries of the system addressed by the
     engagement and related disclosures.

          1.29 In a SOC 2 examination that addresses the confidentiality or pri-
     vacy criteria, the system boundaries would cover, at a minimum, all the sys-
     tem components as they relate to the confidential or personal information life
     cycle, which consists of the collection, use, retention, disclosure, and disposal
     or anonymization of personal information by well-defined processes and infor-
     mal ad hoc procedures, such as emailing personal information to an actuary
     for retirement benefit calculations. The system boundaries would also include
     instances in which that information is combined with other information (for ex-
     ample, in a database or system), a process that would not otherwise cause the
     other information to be included within the scope of the examination. For ex-
     ample, the scope of a SOC 2 examination that addresses the privacy of personal
     information may be limited to a business unit (online book sales) or geograph-
     ical location (Canadian operations), as long as the personal information is not
     commingled with information from, or shared with, other business units or ge-
     ographical locations.

     The Service Organization’s Objectives, Service Commitments,
     and System Requirements
          1.30 A service organization adopts a mission and vision, sets strategies,
     and establishes objectives to help it achieve its mission and vision based on its
     strategies. Management designs and implements various systems to achieve
     specific objectives and designs and implements controls within the systems to
     mitigate the risks that would prevent the entity from achieving those objectives.
     As discussed in more detail in paragraph 1.56, the service organization's objec-
     tives for its services and the system used to deliver those services are embod-
     ied in the service commitments it makes to user entities and the requirements
     it establishes for the functioning of the system used to deliver those services
     (service commitments and system requirements).

          1.31 In order to understand the service provided, the system, and the de-
     sign and operation of the controls, SOC 2 report users usually require an un-
     derstanding of the nature of the service organization's service commitments
     and system requirements. The service commitments and system requirements
     that are likely to be useful to support this understanding by a broad range of
     SOC 2 report users are referred to as principal service commitments and system
     requirements. These principal service commitments and system requirements
     are disclosed in the system description. Although management discloses only
     its principal service commitments and system requirements in the system de-
     scription, management is responsible for designing and operating controls to


AAG-SOP 1.29                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                          Introduction and Background                                 11
provide reasonable assurance that the entire population of its service commit-
ments and system requirements are achieved. Likewise, the service auditor's
opinion considers all of the service organization's service commitments and sys-
tem requirements.

Selecting the Trust Services Category or Categories to Be
Addressed by the Examination
    1.32 In addition to identifying the components and boundaries of the sys-
tem, it is also necessary to consider which trust services category or categories
are to be addressed by the examination. As discussed in paragraph 1.44, the
trust services criteria are used to measure the effectiveness of controls in a
SOC 2 examination. The engaging party, who is also typically the responsible
party, may choose to engage the service auditor to report on controls related
to one or more of the trust services categories (security, availability, processing
integrity, confidentiality, and privacy). Typically, the engaging party selects the
category or categories that would best meet the information needs of intended
users. Which category or categories are selected is often determined by consid-
ering the risks that use of the service organization presents to user entities and
the principal service commitments made to them.

     1.33 Because of increased dependence on technology and concerns about
cybersecurity risks, security is likely to be addressed in most examinations per-
formed using the trust services criteria. Often, customers and business partners
of a service organization are also interested in the effectiveness of controls over
availability because such controls may be integral to meeting their commit-
ments.

     1.34 In some cases, intended users may also be interested in the processing
integrity of the system the service organization uses to process information.
Processing integrity addresses system controls that mitigate the risk that the
service organization's system objectives will not be achieved because of failures
in the processing system.

    1.35 When a service organization uses proprietary customer information
or personal information in the system process, intended users may also be in-
terested in controls over that information. In this case, an examination that
also addresses confidentiality or privacy may best meet users' needs.

     1.36 In some situations, the omission of a category that is likely to be im-
portant to report users may result in a misleading report. For example, the
service auditor may become aware that report users are primarily concerned
about cybersecurity risks arising from the interconnection of the service or-
ganization's system with users' systems. If service organization management
wishes to engage a service auditor to perform an examination addressing only
the availability category, such a report could be misunderstood by users, who
would expect the examination to address controls designed, implemented, and
operated by the service organization to mitigate its cybersecurity risks, not only
those that threaten the achievement of the service organization's availability
commitments. In this situation, the service auditor might conclude that an ex-
amination addressing only the availability category is likely to be misleading
to report users and decide to decline the engagement.


©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP 1.36
12       SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     Difference Between Privacy and Conﬁdentiality
         1.37 As used in this guide, the term "confidentiality" applies to various
     types of sensitive information,10 whereas the term "privacy" applies only to
     personal information11 and embodies the unique considerations in handling
     information related to people. Therefore, a SOC 2 examination that includes
     the trust services privacy category may encompass the service organization's
     specific processes that address the following, as applicable:

                • Notice  of the service organization's privacy commitments and
                  practices
                • Protection of personal information from unauthorized or inappro-
                  priate use and disclosure
                • Data  subjects' choices regarding the use and disclosure of their
                  personal information
                • Data  subjects' rights to access their personal information for re-
                  view and update
                • An inquiry, complaint, and dispute resolution process
         1.38 If the system that is the subject of the SOC 2 examination does not
     create, collect, transmit, use, or store personal information, or if the service or-
     ganization does not make commitments to its system users related to one or
     more of the matters described in the preceding paragraph, a SOC 2 examina-
     tion that addresses the privacy criteria may not be useful because many of the
     privacy criteria will not be applicable. Instead, a SOC 2 examination that ad-
     dresses the confidentiality criteria is likely to provide report users with the
     information they need about how the service organization maintains the confi-
     dentiality of sensitive information used by the system.

     Time Frame of Examination
          1.39 Paragraph .A1 of AT-C section 105 states that the measurement or
     evaluation of conditions or events addressed by an attestation examination may
     be "as of a point in time" or "for a specified period of time." Service organiza-
     tion management is responsible for determining the time frame to be covered
     by the description of the service organization's system. Generally, in a type 1
     examination, the time frame is as of a point in time; in a type 2 examination,
     it is for a specified period of time. Regardless of the time frame selected, the
     SOC 2 examination contemplates that the time frame is the same for both the
     description and management's assertion. Furthermore, the discussions in this
     guide about type 2 examinations contemplate that management has elected to
     have the examination performed for a specified period of time.



           10 Sensitive information varies from organization to organization but often includes nonpub-

     lic information such as the following: regulatory compliance information; financial information used
     for both internal and external reporting purposes; confidential sales information, including customer
     lists; confidential wholesale pricing information and order information; confidential product infor-
     mation including product specifications, new design ideas, and branding strategies; and proprietary
     information provided by business partners, including manufacturing data, sales and pricing informa-
     tion, and licensed designs. Sensitive information also includes personal information.
           11 Personal information is nonpublic information about or related to an identifiable individual,

     such as personal health information or personally identifiable information (such as personnel records,
     payment card information, and online retail customer profile information).


AAG-SOP 1.37                                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                               Introduction and Background                               13
Criteria for a SOC 2 Examination
    1.40 The following two types of criteria are applicable in a SOC 2 exami-
nation:
          • Description criteria. DC section 200, 2018 Description Criteria for
            a Description of a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2 Report
                (With Revised Implementation Guidance — 2022),12 includes the
                criteria used to prepare and evaluate the description of the service
                organization's system. The use of these criteria, referred to as the
                description criteria, in a SOC 2 examination is discussed further
                beginning in paragraph 1.41.
          •     Trust services criteria. TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Crite-
                ria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality,
                and Privacy (With Revised Points of Focus — 2022)13 (the 2017
                trust services criteria), includes the criteria used to evaluate the
                suitability of the design and, in a type 2 examination, the oper-
                ating effectiveness of the controls relevant to the trust services
                category or categories included within the scope of a particular
                examination. The use of these criteria, referred to as the appli-
                cable trust services criteria, in a SOC 2 examination is discussed
                further beginning in paragraph 1.44.

Description Criteria
     1.41 The description criteria are used by management when preparing
the description of the service organization's system and by the service audi-
tor when evaluating the description. Applying the description criteria in actual
situations requires judgment. Therefore, in addition to the description criteria,
DC section 200 presents implementation guidance for each criterion. The im-
plementation guidance presents factors to consider when making judgments
about the nature and extent of disclosures called for by each criterion. The im-
plementation guidance does not address all possible situations; therefore, users
are advised to carefully consider the facts and circumstances of the entity and
its environment in actual situations when applying the description criteria.
    1.42 The description criteria in DC section 200 were promulgated by the
Assurance Services Executive Committee (ASEC). In establishing and devel-
oping these criteria, ASEC followed due process procedures, including expo-
sure of criteria for public comment. BL section 360R, Implementing Resolutions
Under Section 3.6 Committees,14 designates ASEC as a senior technical com-
mittee with the authority to make public statements without clearance from
the AICPA Council or the board of directors. Paragraph .A46 of AT-C section
105 indicates that criteria promulgated by a body designated by the Council of
the AICPA under the AICPA Code of Professional Conduct are, by definition,
considered suitable. Accordingly, these criteria are suitable criteria for prepar-
ing and evaluating a description of a system in a SOC 2 examination. ASEC
has also published the description criteria and made them available to users.
Therefore, the description criteria meet the definition in paragraph .27bii of
AT-C section 105 for criteria that are both suitable and available for use in an
attestation engagement.

   12 The DC sections can be found in AICPA Description Criteria.

   13 The TSP sections can be found in AICPA Trust Services Criteria.

   14   All BL sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.


©2022, AICPA                                                            AAG-SOP 1.42
14       SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

         1.43 Chapter 3, "Performing the SOC 2 Examination," discusses how the
     description criteria are used by the service auditor in a SOC 2 examination.

     Trust Services Criteria
          1.44 The trust services criteria are used to evaluate the suitability of de-
     sign and operating effectiveness of controls stated in the description to provide
     reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commitments and
     system requirements were achieved. Because applying the trust services crite-
     ria requires judgment, TSP section 100 also presents points of focus for each
     criterion. The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Com-
     mission's 2013 Internal Control — Integrated Framework15 (COSO framework)
     states that points of focus represent important characteristics of the criteria in
     that framework. Consistent with the COSO framework, the points of focus in
     TSP section 100 may assist management when designing, implementing, and
     operating controls over security, availability, processing integrity, confidential-
     ity, and privacy. In addition, the points of focus may assist both management
     and the service auditor when evaluating whether controls stated in the descrip-
     tion were suitably designed and operated to provide reasonable assurance that
     the service organization's service commitments and system requirements were
     achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.
          1.45 As previously discussed, a service organization faces risks that
     threaten its ability to achieve its service commitments and system require-
     ments. The criterion for determining whether controls are suitably designed
     is that the controls stated in the description16 would, if operating as described,
     provide reasonable assurance that such risks would not prevent the service or-
     ganization from achieving its service commitments and system requirements.
          1.46 In a type 2 examination, the criterion for determining whether the
     controls stated in the description of the service organization's system operated
     effectively to provide reasonable assurance that its service commitments and
     system requirements were achieved is that the suitably designed controls were
     consistently operated as designed throughout the specified period, including
     that manual controls were applied by individuals who have the appropriate
     competence and authority.
         1.47 The trust services criteria in TSP section 100 were promulgated by
     ASEC. In establishing and developing these criteria, ASEC followed due pro-
     cess procedures, including exposure of criteria for public comment. BL section
     360R designates ASEC as a senior technical committee with the authority to
     make public statements without clearance from the AICPA Council or the board
     of directors. Paragraph .A46 of AT-C section 105 indicates that criteria pro-
     mulgated by a body designated by the Council of the AICPA under the AICPA
     Code of Professional Conduct are, by definition, considered suitable. Accord-
     ingly, these criteria are suitable criteria for evaluating controls in a SOC 2 ex-
     amination. ASEC has also published the trust services criteria and made them
     available to users. Therefore, the trust services criteria meet the requirements


          15 ©2013, Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). All

     rights reserved. Used by permission. See www.coso.org.
          16 Description criterion DC5 in DC section 200, 2018 Description Criteria for a Description of a

     Service Organization's System in a SOC 2 Report (With Revised Implementation Guidance — 2022),
     indicates that the description of the service organization's system should include the applicable trust
     services criteria and the related controls designed to meet those criteria.


AAG-SOP 1.43                                                                          ©2022, AICPA
                          Introduction and Background                                 15
in paragraph .27bii of AT-C section 105 for criteria that are both suitable and
available for use in an attestation engagement.

Categories of Trust Services Criteria
    1.48 The trust services criteria are classified into the following five cate-
gories:
        a. Security. Information and systems are protected against unautho-
           rized access, unauthorized disclosure of information, and damage to
           systems that could compromise the availability, integrity, confiden-
           tiality, and privacy of information or systems and affect the entity's
           ability to meet its objectives.
        b. Availability. Information and systems are available for operation
           and use to meet the entity's objectives.
        c. Processing integrity. System processing is complete, valid, accurate,
           timely, and authorized to meet the entity's objectives.
        d. Confidentiality. Information designated as confidential is protected
           to meet the entity's objectives.
        e. Privacy. Personal information is collected, used, retained, disclosed,
           and disposed of to meet the entity's objectives.
    1.49 Depending on which category or categories are included within the
scope of the examination, the applicable trust services criteria consist of
        • criteria common to all five of the trust services categories (common
          criteria) and
        • additional  specific criteria for the availability, processing integrity,
          confidentiality, and privacy categories.
For example, if the SOC 2 examination is on only availability, the controls
should address all the common criteria and the additional specific criteria for
availability. This is important because a control deficiency related to the com-
mon criteria may affect the service organization's ability to achieve its service
commitments and system requirements related to availability. Therefore, the
service auditor still has to evaluate the suitability of design and, in a type 2
examination, the operating effectiveness of controls related to all the common
criteria (CC1.1 through CC9.2), which encompass controls such as those over
logical and physical access, system operations, and change management, in
addition to controls necessary to meet the criteria related to the availability
category.

Common Criteria
    1.50 The common criteria presented in TSP section 100 (CC1–CC5) are
organized into the following classifications:
        a. Control environment (CC1 series)
        b. Information and communication (CC2 series)
        c. Risk assessment (CC3 series)
        d. Monitoring activities (CC4 series)
        e. Control activities (CC5 series) (Control activities are further bro-
           ken out into the following subclassifications: logical and physical
           access controls [CC6 series], system operations [CC7 series], change
           management [CC8 series], and risk mitigation [CC 9 series].)

©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP 1.50
16      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          1.51 ASEC has determined that the common criteria are suitable for eval-
     uating the effectiveness of controls to achieve a service organization's service
     commitments and system requirements related to security; no additional con-
     trol activity criteria are needed. For the categories of availability, processing
     integrity, confidentiality, and privacy, a complete set of criteria consists of (a)
     the common criteria and (b) the control activity criteria applicable to the spe-
     cific category. Table 1-1 identifies the trust services criteria to be addressed
     when evaluating the effectiveness of controls for each of the trust services cate-
     gories and indicates how each category is labeled in the table presented in TSP
     section 100.

     Table 1-2
                 Criteria for Evaluating the Design and Operating
                              Effectiveness of Controls

                                                          Additional
                  Trust Services         Common        Category-Specific
                    Category             Criteria          Criteria
               Security                 X
               Availability             X             X (A series)
               Processing integrity     X             X (PI series)
               Confidentiality          X             X (C series)
               Privacy                  X             X (P series)

          1.52 Because each system and the environment in which it operates are
     unique, the combination of risks that would prevent a service organization from
     achieving its service commitments and system requirements, and the controls
     necessary to address those risks, will be unique in each SOC 2 examination.
     Management needs to identify the specific risks that threaten the achievement
     of the service organization's service commitments and system requirements
     and the controls necessary to provide reasonable assurance that those service
     commitments and system requirements are achieved based on the category or
     categories to be addressed by the examination, as discussed beginning at para-
     graph 1.32.
         1.53 Service organization management is responsible for evaluating
     whether controls stated in the description were effective to provide reason-
     able assurance that the service commitments and system requirements were
     achieved based on the trust services criteria relevant to one or more of the trust
     services categories addressed by the examination. Such criteria are referred to
     throughout this guide as the applicable trust services criteria. For example, in
     an examination that addresses security, the trust services criteria relevant to
     security, which are the common criteria (CC1.1–CC9.2) presented in TSP sec-
     tion 100, are the applicable trust services criteria.

     Using the Trust Services Criteria in an Engagement That
     Addresses Privacy
         1.54 Some points of focus relevant to criteria in the privacy category may
     apply only to an organization that is a data controller or only to an organi-
     zation that is a data processor. This distinction has been noted within the

AAG-SOP 1.51                                                          ©2022, AICPA
                          Introduction and Background                                 17
privacy-related points of focus to assist management and the service auditor in
identifying situations in which certain points of focus may be particularly rele-
vant. It may also assist management and the service auditor in understanding
how the specific facts and circumstances of the organization's operations may
affect the identification and application of points of focus in an engagement
where privacy is included in the scope of the examination.

Using the Trust Services Criteria to Evaluate Suitability of Design and
Operating Effectiveness in a SOC 2 Examination
     1.55 As previously discussed, the trust services criteria presented in TSP
section 100 are used to evaluate the effectiveness (suitability of design and op-
erating effectiveness) of controls in a SOC 2 examination. These criteria are
based on the COSO framework, which notes that "an organization adopts a
mission and vision, sets strategies, establishes objectives it wants to achieve,
and formulates plans for achieving them." Internal control supports the orga-
nization in achieving its objectives. Consequently, to evaluate internal control,
the evaluator needs to understand the organization's objectives. Many of the
trust services criteria refer to the achievement of "the entity's objectives." In a
SOC 2 examination, the service organization's objectives for its services and the
system used to deliver those services are embodied in the service commitments
it makes to user entities and the requirements it has established for the func-
tioning of the system used to deliver those services (service commitments and
system requirements). For example, when applying CC3.2, The entity identifies
risks to the achievement of its objectives across the entity and analyzes risks as
a basis for determining how the risks should be managed, the service organiza-
tion identifies risks to the achievement of its service commitments and system
requirements and analyzes those risks as a basis for determining how best to
manage them. Chapter 3 discusses in further detail how the service auditor
uses the trust services criteria when evaluating whether controls stated in the
description were suitably designed and, in a type 2 examination, operating ef-
fectively based on the applicable trust services criteria.

Evaluating The Service Organization’s Service Commitments and
System Requirements
    1.56 A service organization's system of internal control is evaluated by us-
ing the trust services criteria to determine whether the service organization's
controls provide reasonable assurance that its business objectives and sub-
objectives are achieved. When a service organization provides services to user
entities, its objectives and sub-objectives relate primarily to (a) the achieve-
ment of the service commitments made to user entities related to the system
used to provide the services and the system requirements necessary to achieve
those commitments, (b) compliance with laws and regulations regarding the
provision of the services by the system, and (c) the achievement of the other
objectives the service organization has for the system. These are referred to as
the service organization's service commitments and system requirements.

    1.57 Service organization management is responsible for establishing its
service commitments and identifying its system requirements. Service commit-
ments are the declarations made by service organization management to user
entities (its customers) about the system used to provide the service. Commit-
ments can be communicated in written individualized agreements, standard-
ized contracts, service-level agreements, or published statements (for example,

©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP 1.57
18      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     a security practices statement). Commitments may be made on many different
     aspects of the service being provided, including the following:

             • Specification of the algorithm used in a calculation
             • The hours a system will be available
             • Published password standards
             • Encryption standards used to encrypt stored customer data
             • Implementation    of controls to meet the requirements of a partic-
               ular process or control framework (for example, the National In-
                  stitute of Standards and Technology's Cybersecurity Framework
                  [NIST CSF])
          1.58 Service commitments may also be made about one or more of the
     trust services categories addressed by the description. As an example, if con-
     trols over privacy are addressed by the description, a service organization may
     make commitments such as the following:

             • The organization will not process or transfer information without
               obtaining the data subject's consent.
             • The organization will provide a privacy notice to customers once
               every six months or when there is a change in the organization's
                  business policies.
             •    The organization will respond to access requests within 10 work-
                  ing days of receiving the requests from its customers.
          1.59 System requirements are the specifications about how the system
     should function to (a) meet the service organization's service commitments to
     user entities and others (such as user entities' customers); (b) meet the ser-
     vice organization's commitments to vendors and business partners; (c) comply
     with relevant laws and regulations and guidelines of industry groups, such as
     business or trade associations; and (d) achieve other objectives of the service
     organization that are relevant to the trust services categories addressed by the
     description. Requirements are often specified in the service organization's sys-
     tem policies and procedures, system design documentation, contracts with cus-
     tomers, and in government regulations. The following are examples of system
     requirements:

             • Workforce   member fingerprinting and background checks estab-
               lished in government banking regulations
             • Legal requirements to prevent certain types of transactions
             • Entity  policies establishing maximum acceptable intervals be-
               tween periodic review of workforce member logical access as doc-
                  umented in the security policy manual
             •    Data definition and tagging standards, including any associated
                  metadata requirements (for example, the Simple Object Access
                  Protocol [SOAP]) established by industry groups or other bodies
             •    Business processing rules and standards established by regula-
                  tors (for example, security requirements under the Health Insur-
                  ance Portability and Accountability Act [HIPAA])
         1.60 System requirements may result from the service organization's com-
     mitments relating to one or more of the trust services categories (for example,
     a commitment to programmatically enforce segregation of duties between data

AAG-SOP 1.58                                                        ©2022, AICPA
                                 Introduction and Background                                              19
entry and data approval creates system requirements regarding user access
administration).
     1.61 Service organization management is responsible for achieving its ser-
vice commitments and system requirements. It is also responsible for stating in
the description the service organization's principal service commitments and
system requirements with sufficient clarity to enable report users to under-
stand the nature of system operation and management's and the service audi-
tor's basis for evaluating the suitability of the design of controls and, in a type 2
examination, the operating effectiveness of controls. Because of the importance
of the service commitments and system requirements to the SOC 2 examina-
tion, the principal service commitments and system requirements disclosed by
management should be appropriate for the engagement. Chapter 2, "Accepting
and Planning a SOC 2 Examination," discusses the service auditor's respon-
sibility for assessing whether the principal service commitments and system
requirements disclosed by service organization management in the description
are appropriate.


Meeting the Requirements of a Process
or Control Framework
     1.62 In some situations, governmental bodies, industry consortiums, or
groups of subject matter experts may develop process or control frameworks (for
example, International Organization for Standardization and International
Electrotechnical Commission [ISO/IEC] Standards 27001 and 27002, NIST
CSF) for obtaining and sharing specific information from other entities, includ-
ing service organizations, about a particular subject matter of interest to them
(for example, security controls over sensitive information). Most process or con-
trol frameworks identify specific sets of processes or controls (referred to in
this guide as requirements of the process or control framework) for entities to
implement. In addition, many frameworks establish certification programs to
demonstrate that entities have met the requirements of the process or control
framework.17 The most common types of process or control frameworks focus on
information security and privacy. A governmental body, industry consortium, or
group of experts that develops and maintains such a framework is referred to
as a sponsoring organization throughout this document.
    1.63 In some situations, a process or control framework may be required
by law or regulation (for instance, the security and privacy rules established
to implement HIPAA); in other situations, the service organization may make
commitments to customers or business partners about addressing the require-
ments of a process or control framework, or the service organization may elect
to implement controls that address the requirements of such a framework as
part of its risk management program.
    1.64 When the service organization establishes service commitments and
system requirements regarding the requirements of the process or control
framework, the evaluation of whether controls were suitably designed and
operated effectively would include consideration of whether the implemented


     17 A limited number of process or control framework may have similar objectives to those of

the trust services criteria (that is, controls within the system are suitably designed and operating
effectively). However, this guide focuses on situations in which the objective is simply implementation
of certain controls.


©2022, AICPA                                                                          AAG-SOP 1.64
20       SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     controls met those requirements. In this situation, the requirements of the pro-
     cess or control framework are likely to be additional points of focus when using
     the trust services criteria.18,19 For example, a service organization that provides
     services to a U.S. government entity would likely consider the requirements
     of the NIST CSF and NIST Special Publication (NIST SP) 800-171, Protecting
     Controlled Unclassified Information in Nonfederal Systems and Organizations,
     as points of focus when evaluating whether its controls are suitably designed
     and operating effectively.

          1.65 Management may decide to provide users with certain information
     in the SOC 2 report that supports users' understanding of how the controls im-
     plemented by the service organization address the requirements of a process
     or control framework. If management considers such disclosures to be supple-
     mental to the information included in the SOC 2 report, management would or-
     dinarily present such disclosures in section 5, "Other Information Provided by
     XYZ Service Organization That Is Not Covered by the Service Auditor's Report"
     of the SOC 2 report. The service auditor's responsibility for other information
     is discussed beginning in paragraph 4.101.

         1.66 In other situations, management may include such disclosures in the
     description of the system. This is likely to be the case when management has
     identified a principal service commitment or system requirement related to
     the process or control framework. In this situation, management would gen-
     erally include information about how the system components, including pro-
     cesses and controls (DC3),20 addressed requirements of the process or control
     framework and how the implemented controls met those requirements (DC5).
     Paragraph 3.48 describes different ways that these disclosures may be made.
     The service auditor's responsibility for such disclosures is discussed beginning
     at paragraph 3.50.

         1.67 To meet the requests of users, management may engage the service
     auditor to examine and report on whether the service organization's controls
     were implemented to meet the requirements of the process or control frame-
     work in a SOC 2+ examination, which is discussed beginning at paragraph
     1.69.

          1.68 Chapter 2 provides additional guidance on how the service organiza-
     tion's service commitments and system requirements related to the implemen-
     tation of controls to meet the requirements of a process or control framework
     may affect the service auditor's planning and risk assessment procedures; chap-
     ter 3 further discusses the effect on the evaluation of the suitability of design
     and operating effectiveness of controls; and chapter 4 discusses the impact on
     forming an opinion and issuing the report.



          18 As discussed in paragraph 1.44, points of focus are important characteristics of the criteria

     that assist both management and the service auditor when applying the criteria. Some points of fo-
     cus may not be suitable or relevant to the service organization or to the SOC 2 engagement. In other
     situations, management may identify and consider other characteristics based on the specific circum-
     stances of the entity.
          19 To facilitate the consideration of the requirements of some of the more commonly-used process

     and control frameworks as complementary or additional points of focus, the AICPA has mapped those
     requirements to the trust services criteria. Such mappings can be found on the AICPA website.
          20 "(DCX)," as used in this guide, refers to the specific number of the description criterion that

     addresses the issue discussed.


AAG-SOP 1.65                                                                          ©2022, AICPA
                                 Introduction and Background                                                21
SOC 2 Examination That Addresses Additional
Criteria (SOC 2+)
     1.69 As discussed in paragraph 1.63, there are situations in which a ser-
vice organization makes commitments about implementing a set of processes or
controls to meet the requirements of a specific process or control framework and
establishes system requirements to support the achievement of those commit-
ments. If management determines that intended users of the report are likely
to want assurance about whether the service organization achieved those com-
mitments and requirements, it may engage the service auditor to also examine
and issue a separate opinion about whether the organization has implemented
processes or controls to meet the requirements of the process or control frame-
work. In this situation, both management and the service auditor evaluate the
controls that management has implemented to meet the objective of the process
or control framework (additional criteria) to support management's assertion
and the service auditor's additional opinion, respectively. In many cases, the ob-
jective of the process or control framework is the implementation of a specific
set of processes or controls.21
     1.70 A SOC 2 examination that includes an additional opinion about mat-
ters that are not normally within the scope of the SOC 2 examination is typi-
cally referred to as a SOC 2+ examination. Although the additional matters in
a SOC 2+ examination most frequently relate to whether controls were imple-
mented to meet the requirements of a process or control framework, a SOC 2+
examination may also include other matters not ordinarily addressed by a SOC
2 examination. For example, management may want to provide customers and
business partners with certain metrics that demonstrate how the service or-
ganization has achieved its availability commitments. Because it believes such
metrics are important to judgments made by users, management may engage a
service auditor to determine whether such metrics are presented in accordance
with additional specified criteria.
     1.71 In this guide, guidance related to SOC 2+ examinations assumes
that the service auditor's additional opinion is on whether controls were im-
plemented to meet the requirements of a process or control framework.22 Pro-
cess or control frameworks, as that term is used in this guide, are discussed in
further detail beginning at paragraph 1.62.
     1.72 A SOC 2+ examination is performed in accordance with AT-C section
205 and relevant guidance in this guide. To address the additional criteria in
the SOC 2+ examination, in accordance with paragraph .20 of AT-C section 205,
the service auditor should perform procedures to obtain sufficient appropriate
evidence about whether the service organization's controls were implemented
to meet the control requirements in the process or control framework. Chapter 2
discusses the impact of additional criteria on the service auditor's planning and
risk assessment procedures, chapter 3 discusses the impact on the evaluation of


     21 A limited number of process or control frameworks may have similar objectives to those

of the trust services criteria (that is, controls within the system are suitably designed and operat-
ing effectively). In this situation, the evaluation of the suitability of design and operating effective-
ness of controls using the trust services criteria and the other framework should result in a similar
conclusion.
     22 In some situations, two separate engagements with two separate reports may meet the users'

needs better than a SOC 2+ engagement. Management and the service auditor may work together to
determine the type of engagement and report that would best meet the needs of the user.


©2022, AICPA                                                                            AAG-SOP 1.72
22       SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     controls, and chapter 4 discusses the impact on forming an opinion and issuing
     the SOC 2+ report.


     SOC 3 Examination
          1.73 A service organization may wish to provide prospective customers
     (user entities) with information regarding the effectiveness of controls over its
     system. However, the prospective customers may not have signed a nondisclo-
     sure agreement required by the service organization to access the system de-
     scription in the SOC 2 report. In other situations, prospective customers may
     not have sufficient knowledge about the system, which might cause them to
     misunderstand the information in the SOC 2 report. In these circumstances, a
     SOC 3 report, which is designed for general use, may be appropriate. Because
     the procedures performed in a SOC 2 examination are substantially the same as
     those performed in a SOC 3 examination, the service organization may ask the
     service auditor to issue two reports at the end of the examination: a SOC 2 re-
     port to meet the governance needs of its existing customers and a SOC 3 report
     to meet the needs of a broader set of users. Because these users may not have
     sufficient understanding of the service organization's system, the disclosure of
     the service auditor's tests performed and results of tests may overshadow the
     service auditor's overall opinion or may cause users to misunderstand the ser-
     vice auditor's report. As a result, the SOC 3 report includes only the following
     elements as identified in paragraph 4.119:

               a. An assertion by service organization management about whether
                  the controls were effective throughout the period
               b. An opinion by the service auditor on service organization manage-
                  ment's assertion about whether controls within the system were
                  effective throughout the period

          1.74 There is no type 1 equivalent for a SOC 3 report. In a SOC 3 exami-
     nation, service organization management prepares, and includes in the SOC 3
     report, a written assertion about whether the controls within the system were
     effective23 throughout the specified period to provide reasonable assurance that
     the service organization's service commitments and system requirements were
     achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria. In connection with the
     assertion, management also describes (a) the boundaries of the system and (b)
     the service organization's principal service commitments and system require-
     ments. Such disclosures, which ordinarily accompany the assertion, enable re-
     port users to understand the scope of the SOC 3 examination and how manage-
     ment evaluated the effectiveness of controls. The SOC 3 report also includes the
     service auditor's opinion on whether management's assertion was fairly stated
     based on the applicable trust services criteria. As in a SOC 2 examination, a ser-
     vice auditor may be engaged to report on one or more of the five trust services
     categories included in TSP section 100.
          1.75 Unlike a SOC 2 report, a SOC 3 report does not include a description
     of the system, so the detailed controls within the system are not disclosed. In
     addition, the SOC 3 report does not include a description of the service auditor's


          23 Throughout this guide, the term effective (as it relates to controls) encompasses both the

     suitability of design of controls and the operating effectiveness of controls.


AAG-SOP 1.73                                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                                 Introduction and Background                                              23
tests of controls and the results thereof.24 Appendix A, "Comparison of SOC 1,
SOC 2, and SOC 3 Examinations and Related Reports," compares a SOC 2 and
a SOC 3 report.
    1.76 Chapter 2 discusses planning considerations in a SOC 3 examination,
and chapter 4 discusses the reporting elements of a SOC 3 report.


Other Types of SOC Examinations: SOC Suite of Services
     1.77 The term system and organization controls (SOC) refers to a suite
of services that practitioners may provide relating to system-level controls of
a service organization and system- or entity-level controls of other organiza-
tions. The SOC suite of services currently comprises the following individual
reporting frameworks:
          1. SOC 1 — SOC for Service Organizations: ICFR25
          2. SOC 2 — SOC for Service Organizations: Trust Services Criteria
          3. SOC 3 — SOC for Service Organizations: Trust Services Criteria
             for General Use Report
          4. SOC for Cybersecurity
          5. SOC for Supply Chain

SOC 1 — SOC for Service Organizations: ICFR
     1.78 AT-C section 320, Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Ser-
vice Organization Relevant to User Entities' Internal Control Over Financial Re-
porting, provides performance and reporting requirements for an examination
of controls at a service organization that are likely to be relevant to user enti-
ties' internal control over financial reporting. A service organization's controls
are relevant to a user entity's internal control over financial reporting when
they are part of the user entity's information and communications component
of internal control maintained by the service organization.26 Such an examina-
tion is known as a SOC 1 examination, and the resulting report is known as a
SOC 1 report. The controls are generally those that a service organization im-
plements to prevent, or detect and correct, misstatements27 in the information
or services it provides to user entities.


     24 Because the SOC 3 report was designed as a general use report, a description of the service

auditor's procedures and results is not included in the report. According to paragraph .A85 of AT-C
section 205, the addition of such information may increase the potential for the report to be misunder-
stood, which may lead the service auditor to add a restricted-use paragraph to the report; therefore,
a SOC 3 report containing such information is unlikely to be appropriate for general use.
     25 ICFR stands for internal control over financial reporting.

     26 Controls also may be relevant when they are part of one or more of the other components of a

user entity's internal control over financial reporting. The components of an entity's internal control
over financial reporting are described in detail in appendix B, "Internal Control Components," of AU-
C section 315A, Understanding the Entity and Its Environment and Assessing the Risks of Material
Misstatement.
      All AU-C sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.
     27 Paragraph .12 of AT-C section 105, Concepts Common to All Attestation Engagements, de-

fines a misstatement as a difference between the measurement or evaluation of the underling subject
matter and the appropriate measurement or evaluation of the underlying subject matter in accor-
dance with (or based on) the criteria. Misstatements can be intentional or unintentional, qualitative
or quantitative, and include omissions. Throughout this guide, the terms description misstatements,
deviations, and deficiencies all refer to types of misstatements.


©2022, AICPA                                                                          AAG-SOP 1.78
24      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          1.79 Service organizations frequently receive requests from user entities
     for SOC 1 reports because they are useful in designing, implementing, and eval-
     uating the user entities' own internal control over financial reporting and are
     needed by the auditors of the user entities' financial statements (user audi-
     tors) to obtain information about controls at the service organization that may
     affect assertions in the user entities' financial statements. A SOC 1 report is
     intended solely for the information and use of management of the service orga-
     nization, user entities of the service organization's system during some or all
     of the period covered by the report, and the auditors who audit and report on
     such user entities' financial statements or internal control over financial report-
     ing. AICPA Guide Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Orga-
     nization Relevant to User Entities' Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
     (SOC 1® ) contains application guidance for service auditors.
         1.80 Appendix A of this guide includes a table that presents the differences
     between SOC 1, SOC 2, and SOC 3 examinations and related reports.

     SOC for Cybersecurity
          1.81 Cybersecurity has become a top concern for boards of directors and
     senior executives of many entities, regardless of their size or the industry in
     which they operate. Government officials are also concerned about cybersecu-
     rity at governmental agencies and departments. For most entities, cybersecu-
     rity is a significant business risk that needs to be identified, assessed, and man-
     aged along with other business risks the entity faces, and it is management's
     responsibility to ensure that all employees throughout the entity, not only those
     in the information technology department, address cybersecurity risks. Manag-
     ing this business issue is especially challenging because even an entity with a
     highly sophisticated cybersecurity risk management program has a residual
     risk that a material cybersecurity breach can occur and not be detected in a
     timely manner. Furthermore, the combined effects of an entity's dependency on
     information technology, the complexity of information technology networks and
     business applications, extensive reliance on third parties, and human nature
     (for instance, susceptibility to social engineering) are only likely to increase the
     need for effective cybersecurity risk management programs in the foreseeable
     future.
          1.82 For those reasons, the AICPA has developed a framework for orga-
     nizations to describe their cybersecurity risk management programs and for
     practitioners to examine and report on a description of an entity's cybersecurity
     risk management program and the effectiveness of controls within the program.
     This examination is known as a cybersecurity risk management examination;
     the related report is known as a cybersecurity risk management examination
     report. Criteria for describing a cybersecurity risk management program can
     be found in DC section 100, Description Criteria for Management's Description
     of the Entity's Cybersecurity Risk Management Program, and the performance
     and reporting requirements for an examination of the description are found in
     AT-C section 105 and AT-C section 205. AICPA Guide Reporting on an Entity's
     Cybersecurity Risk Management Program and Controls contains interpretive
     application guidance for practitioners performing these engagements.
         1.83 The cybersecurity risk management examination report includes
     three key components: (a) the description of the entity's cybersecurity risk man-
     agement program, (b) management's assertion about whether the description is
     presented in accordance with the description criteria and whether the controls

AAG-SOP 1.79                                                           ©2022, AICPA
                           Introduction and Background                                 25
within the cybersecurity risk management program were effective to achieve
the entity's cybersecurity objectives based on the control criteria, and (c) the
practitioner's opinion about whether the description is presented in accordance
with the description criteria and whether the controls within the cybersecurity
risk management program were effective to achieve the entity's cybersecurity
objectives based on the control criteria.
     1.84 In the cybersecurity risk management examination, management se-
lects the criteria to be used to prepare the description of the entity's cybersecu-
rity risk management program (description criteria) and the criteria to be used
to evaluate the effectiveness of controls within that program (control criteria).
    1.85 Because the practitioner's report is designed to be included in the
cybersecurity risk management examination report, which is intended for gen-
eral distribution, the practitioner's report is appropriate for general use. Nev-
ertheless, practitioners may decide to restrict the use of the report to specified
users.
    1.86 Appendix B, "Comparison of SOC 2, SOC for Supply Chain, and SOC
for Cybersecurity Examinations and Related Reports," of this guide presents
the differences between a SOC 2 examination and a cybersecurity risk man-
agement examination.

SOC for Supply Chain
     1.87 Due to rapid technological advancement, the production, manufac-
turing, or distribution of products often involves a high level of interdepen-
dence and connectivity between the entity and (a) organizations that supply
raw materials or components for the manufacturing process (suppliers) and (b)
its customers and business partners. These relationships are often considered
part of the supply chain. A supply chain is a system of organizations, people,
activities, information, and resources involved in moving a product from sup-
plier to customer. Supply chain activities involve the transformation of natural
resources, raw materials, and components into finished goods.
     1.88 Although these relationships may increase revenues, expand market
opportunities, and reduce costs for the entity, they also result in additional risks
to the suppliers, customers, and business partners with whom the entity does
business. Accordingly, those suppliers, customers, and business partners are
responsible for identifying, evaluating, and addressing those additional risks
as part of their supply chain risk management programs.
    1.89 To identify, assess, and address the risks arising from interactions be-
tween the entity and the system it uses to produce, manufacture, or distribute
products, suppliers, customers, and business partners usually need information
about the design, operation, and effectiveness of controls within the system. To
support their risk assessments, suppliers, customers, or business partners may
request an attestation report from the entity. Such a report is the result of
an attestation engagement in which a practitioner examines and opines on (a)
whether the description of the entity's system that produces, manufactures, or
distributes products (the description of the system or description) presents the
system that was designed and implemented in accordance with the descrip-
tion criteria and (b) whether the controls stated in the description, which are
necessary to provide reasonable assurance that the entity achieved its system
objectives, were effective throughout the period, based on the applicable trust
services criteria.

©2022, AICPA                                                          AAG-SOP 1.89
26      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

        1.90 Appendix B of this guide presents the differences between a SOC 2
     examination and a SOC for Supply Chain examination.


     Professional Standards
          1.91 This guide provides guidance for a service auditor performing either
     a type 1 or a type 2 SOC 2 examination in accordance with the attestation
     standards. In addition to the performance and reporting guidance in the attes-
     tation standards, a service auditor performing a SOC 2 examination is required
     to comply with the requirements of other professional standards, such as pro-
     fessional ethics and quality control standards. This section discusses each of
     the professional standards that apply to a SOC 2 examination.

     Attestation Standards
          1.92 The service auditor performs a SOC 2 examination under AT-C sec-
     tion 205, which supplements the requirements and guidance in AT-C section
     105. In performing an assertion-based examination, the practitioner is required
     to comply with both of these sections.
         1.93 This guide provides additional application guidance to assist a ser-
     vice auditor engaged to perform and report in a SOC 2 examination. Because
     this guide is an interpretive publication, paragraph .21 of AT-C section 105
     requires the service auditor to consider this guidance when planning and per-
     forming a SOC 2 examination.
         1.94 In some cases, this guide repeats or refers to the requirements in
     AT-C section 105 and AT-C section 205 when describing the performance and
     reporting requirements with which a service auditor should comply in a SOC
     2 examination. Although not all the requirements in AT-C section 105 and AT-
     C section 205 are repeated or referred to in this guide, the service auditor is
     responsible for complying with all relevant requirements contained in those
     sections.

     Code of Professional Conduct
          1.95 The AICPA Code of Professional Conduct provides guidance and rules
     that apply to all members in the performance of their professional responsibili-
     ties. The code includes the fundamental principles that govern the performance
     of all professional services performed by CPAs and, among other things, calls
     for CPAs to maintain high ethical standards and to exercise due care in the per-
     formance of all services. When providing attestation services, the "Considering
     or Subsequent Employment or Association With an Attest Client" subtopic (ET
     sec. 1.279)28 of the "Independence Rule" (ET sec. 1.200.001) requires CPAs to
     be independent in both fact and appearance. Independence in a SOC 2 exami-
     nation is discussed further beginning in paragraph 2.41.

     Quality in the SOC 2 Examination
         1.96 Paragraphs .06–.07 of AT-C section 105 discuss the relationship be-
     tween the attestation standards and the AICPA quality control standards.
     Quality control systems, policies, and procedures are the responsibility of a firm


        28   All ET sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.


AAG-SOP 1.90                                                                 ©2022, AICPA
                               Introduction and Background                          27
when conducting its attestation practice. Under QM section 10A, A Firm's Sys-
tem of Quality Control,29 a CPA firm has an obligation to establish and maintain
a system of quality control to provide it with reasonable assurance that
          a. the firm and its personnel comply with professional standards and
             applicable legal and regulatory requirements and
          b. reports issued by the firm are appropriate in the circumstances.
     1.97 QM section 10A additionally states that the firm should establish cri-
teria against which all engagements are to be evaluated to determine whether
an engagement quality control review should be performed. If the engagement
meets the established criteria, the nature, timing, and extent of the engagement
quality control review should follow the guidance discussed in that standard
and the requirements in paragraph .45 of AT-C section 105.
    1.98 Paragraph .35 of AT-C section 105 states that the engagement part-
ner should take responsibility for the overall quality of the attestation engage-
ment, including matters such as client acceptance and continuance, compliance
with professional standards, and maintenance of appropriate documentation,
among others. As part of those responsibilities, paragraph .34 of AT-C section
105 states that the engagement partner should be satisfied that all members of
the engagement team, including external specialists, have the competence and
capabilities to perform the engagement in accordance with professional stan-
dards and applicable legal and regulatory requirements. Chapter 2 discusses
assessing the competence and capabilities that members of the engagement
team need to possess to perform a SOC 2 examination.
    1.99 Additionally, paragraph .36 of AT-C section 105 states that the
engagement partner should remain alert, through observation and making
inquiries as necessary, for evidence of noncompliance with relevant ethical
requirements by members of the engagement team. If matters come to the en-
gagement partner's attention through the firm's system of quality control or
otherwise that indicate that members of the engagement team have not com-
plied with relevant ethical requirements, the engagement partner, in consulta-
tion with others in the firm, should determine the appropriate action.

Deﬁnitions
    1.100 Definitions of the terms used in this guide are included in appendix
H, "Definitions."




   29   All QM sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.


©2022, AICPA                                                            AAG-SOP 1.100
                       Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                      29
Chapter 2
  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination
  Service organization management and the service auditor each have specific
  responsibilities in a SOC 2 examination. This chapter describes the service
  auditor's responsibilities, including the preconditions of engagement accep-
  tance and the need to obtain a written assertion from and establish an un-
  derstanding about the terms of the engagement with management. As part
  of establishing the terms of the engagement, the service auditor should un-
  derstand management's responsibilities in the engagement; therefore, this
  chapter also provides a brief overview of management's responsibilities.


  Introduction
      2.01 AT-C section 105, Concepts Common to All Attestation Engagements,1
  establishes certain preconditions prior to accepting a SOC 2 examination.
  Among other things, those preconditions include the service auditor determin-
  ing whether the engagement team meets the ethical and competency require-
  ments set forth in the professional standards and whether the engagement
  meets the relevant requirements of the attestation standards. AT-C section 105
  also addresses establishing an understanding with service organization man-
  agement.
      2.02 Once an engagement has been accepted, AT-C section 205, Assertion-
  Based Examination Engagements, sets forth the requirements for developing
  an overall strategy and planning the engagement. This chapter discusses con-
  siderations for accepting and planning a SOC 2 examination.


  Understanding Service Organization Management’s
  Responsibilities
      2.03 In accordance with paragraph .29 of AT-C section 105, the service
  auditor should accept a SOC 2 examination only when the service auditor
  has reached a common understanding with service organization management
  about the terms of the engagement. Paragraph .08 of AT-C section 205 indi-
  cates that these terms should include the responsibilities of both management
  and the service auditor. This section provides an overview of management's re-
  sponsibilities. Because many of the decisions service organization management
  makes prior to engaging the service auditor can affect the nature, timing, and
  extent of procedures the service auditor performs, this section also discusses
  those aspects of management's responsibilities.

  Management Responsibilities Prior to Engaging
  the Service Auditor
      2.04 Service organization management is responsible for having a rea-
  sonable basis for asserting that (a) the description of the service organization's


     1   All AT-C sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.


  ©2022, AICPA                                                             AAG-SOP 2.04
30       SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     system is presented in accordance with the description criteria, (b) the con-
     trols stated in the description were suitably designed to provide reasonable
     assurance that the service organization's service commitments and system re-
     quirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria, and
     (c) in a type 2 examination, those controls were operating effectively to pro-
     vide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commitments
     and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services
     criteria. Management's assertion is based, in part, on management having (a)
     identified the service commitments and system requirements, (b) identified
     and analyzed the risks that threaten the achievement of those service com-
     mitments and system requirements, and (c) designed, implemented, and oper-
     ated controls that provide reasonable assurance that the service commitments
     and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services
     criteria.
         2.05 Service organization management2 is responsible for making a vari-
     ety of decisions that affect the nature, timing, and extent of procedures to be
     performed in a SOC 2 examination, including the following:
               • Defining
                 ing:
                          the scope of the examination, which includes the follow-

                           — Identifying the services provided to user entities, which
                             will establish the subject matter of the examination
                           — Identifying the system used to provide those services
                           — Identifying the boundaries of the system
                           — Identifying the risks from business partners providing in-
                             tellectual property or services to the service organization
                             related to the system
                           — Selecting the trust services category or categories to be
                             included within the scope of the examination
                           — Determining the type (type 1 or type 2) of SOC 2 exami-
                             nation to be performed
                           — Determining the period to be covered by the examination
                             or, in the case of a type 1 report, the specified "as of" date
                           — If services are provided to the service organization by
                             other entities, evaluating the effect of those services
                             on the service organization's achievement of its service
                             commitments and system requirements and concluding
                             whether those other entities are subservice organizations
                             (paragraph 2.07)
                           — Determining whether subservice organizations, if any,
                             are to be addressed in the report using the inclusive
                             method or the carve-out method (paragraph 2.14)
                           — If a subservice organization is to be presented using the
                             inclusive method, obtaining agreement from subservice

          2 In a SOC 2 engagement, service organization management is the responsible party. This guide

     uses the terms service organization management and responsible party interchangeably. In most cases,
     but not all, service organization management is also the engaging party. This guide also provides
     guidance for situations in which service organization management is not the engaging party and
     there are specific requirements for such an engaging party.



AAG-SOP 2.05                                                                        ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                          31
                       organization management to participate in the exami-
                       nation

         • Specifying the principal service commitments made to user enti-
           ties and the system requirements needed to operate the system
         • Specifying the principal system requirements related to commit-
           ments made to business partners
         • Identifying and assessing risks that could prevent the service or-
           ganization from achieving its service commitments and system
             requirements
         •   Designing, implementing, operating, monitoring, and document-
             ing controls that are suitably designed and, in a type 2 examina-
             tion, operating effectively to provide reasonable assurance that
             the service organization's service commitments and system re-
             quirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services
             criteria
         •   Identifying known system incidents that

                  —    were the result of controls that were not suitably de-
                       signed or operating effectively or
                  —    otherwise resulted in a significant failure in the achieve-
                       ment of one or more of those service commitments and
                       system requirements

     2.06 Before service organization management can fulfill those responsi-
bilities, management may need clarification of certain matters from the ser-
vice auditor. For example, management may have questions about whether
certain processes are part of the system used to provide the services, whether
a vendor is a subservice organization, and what factors to consider in deter-
mining whether to use the inclusive or the carve-out method to present infor-
mation about a subservice organization. When providing assistance to man-
agement, the service auditor needs to exercise care that the service auditor's
independence is not impaired by taking on the role of management, otherwise
assuming management responsibilities, or being placed in a position of evalu-
ating the service auditor's own work. Independence is discussed beginning in
paragraph 2.41.

Considerations in Identifying Subservice Organizations
     2.07 Most entities, including service organizations, outsource various
functions to other organizations (vendors). The functions provided by these ven-
dors may affect the delivery of services to user entities. Although management
can delegate responsibility for these functions, management retains respon-
sibility for the achievement of the service organization's service commitments
and system requirements. When controls at the vendors are necessary, in combi-
nation with the service organization's controls, to provide reasonable assurance
that the service organization's service commitments and system requirements
are achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria, the vendor is con-
sidered a subservice organization. A subservice organization may be a separate
entity that is external to the service organization or may be a related entity, for
example, a subservice organization that is a subsidiary of the same entity that
owns the service organization.


©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP 2.07
32      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          2.08 In this guide, a vendor is considered a subservice organization only
     if the following apply:

             • The services provided by the vendor are likely to be relevant to
               report users' understanding of the service organization's system
                  as it relates to the applicable trust services criteria.
             •    Controls at the vendor are necessary, in combination with the ser-
                  vice organization's controls, to provide reasonable assurance that
                  the service organization's service commitments and system re-
                  quirements are achieved based on the applicable trust services
                  criteria.

          2.09 If the service organization's controls alone provide reasonable assur-
     ance that its service commitments and system requirements are achieved, or
     if the service organization's monitoring of the vendor's services and controls is
     sufficient to provide reasonable assurance that its service commitments and
     system requirements are achieved, the vendor's controls over its services are
     not likely to be relevant to the SOC 2 examination. Although service organi-
     zation management is responsible for determining whether one or more of its
     vendors are considered subservice organizations, it is important that the ser-
     vice auditor agree with management's determinations.

         2.10 Determining whether a vendor is a subservice organization is easy in
     some situations but not in others. The following examples may be helpful when
     evaluating management's conclusion as to whether a vendor is considered a
     subservice organization:

             • ABC  Vendor is responsible for performing quarterly maintenance
               on the service organization's backup power system; service orga-
                  nization personnel participate in post-maintenance testing used
                  to verify the backup power system is working as intended, which
                  serves as a primary control. In this instance, ABC Vendor's con-
                  trols are not necessary for the service organization to achieve
                  its service commitments and system requirements based on the
                  applicable trust services criteria for availability; therefore, ABC
                  Vendor would not be considered a subservice organization.
             •    XYZ Vendor is responsible for monitoring service capacity and us-
                  age and for projecting future capacity demands based on histori-
                  cal trends. Without additional controls at the service organization,
                  controls at the vendor are necessary for the service organization
                  to achieve its service commitments and system requirements re-
                  lated to availability based on the applicable trust services criteria.
                  Therefore, XYZ Vendor would be considered a subservice organi-
                  zation. However, if the service organization were to independently
                  perform high-level capacity monitoring activities and review the
                  future capacity demands projected by XYZ Vendor for appropri-
                  ateness, XYZ Vendor might not be considered a subservice orga-
                  nization because the vendor's controls may not be necessary for
                  the service organization to achieve its service commitments and
                  system requirements based on the applicable trust services crite-
                  ria. The service auditor would need to use judgment to determine
                  whether the review controls were precise enough that the vendor
                  controls would not be necessary.

AAG-SOP 2.08                                                          ©2022, AICPA
                       Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                                          33
           • Atesting
                 service organization outsources its application development
                      to DEF Vendor and contractually specifies that certain
                 controls be executed by DEF Vendor. The service organization des-
                 ignates a service organization employee to oversee the outsourced
                 services, and that employee compares DEF Vendor's test plans,
                 test scripts, and test data to the service organization's application
                 change requests and detailed design documents. The designated
                 service organization employee also reviews the results of testing
                 performed by DEF Vendor before approving changes to the appli-
                 cation and submitting them to the service organization for user
                 acceptance testing. In this instance, even though the controls ex-
                 pected to be performed by DEF Vendor are stipulated in the con-
                 tract, management concluded and the service auditor concurred
                 that the controls at DEF Vendor are not necessary for the ser-
                 vice organization to assert that its controls provide reasonable as-
                 surance that the service organization's availability commitments
                 were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria. Be-
                 cause the controls are not necessary, DEF Vendor would not be
                 considered a subservice organization.
           •     A service organization purchases from JKL Vendor a tool to mon-
                 itor and report on the status of configuration settings that affect
                 the operation of control activities. JKL Vendor also provides ser-
                 vices around the use of that tool through a software-as-a-service
                 (SaaS) model. In this situation, management has effectively out-
                 sourced monitoring of the configuration settings to JKL Vendor.
                 Because management considers this function and related controls
                 necessary to the achievement of the service organization's ser-
                 vice commitments and system requirements, JKL Vendor would
                 be considered a subservice organization.

Management’s Use of Specialists
     2.11 Increasingly, service organizations are using external specialists
(management's specialists)3 to leverage knowledge, technologies, experience,
and expertise not resident within the service organization. If information pro-
duced by the management's specialist is used by the service auditor, the ser-
vice auditor may need to perform further procedures to determine if such infor-
mation is sufficiently reliable for the service auditor's purposes, as discussed
further in paragraph 3.145. Such management's specialists may include the
following:
           • Security penetration testers
           • Cybersecurity breach investigators
           • Software vulnerability scanning service providers
           • Disaster recovery simulation providers
     3 The term management's specialist, as used in this guide, is defined as an individual or orga-

nization possessing expertise in a field other than accounting or attestation, whose work in that field
is used by the service organization to assist the service organization in preparing the description or
enhancing the effectiveness of controls. Although this term is not used in the attestation standards,
this definition is consistent with that in AU-C section 620A, Using the Work of an Auditor's Specialist.
A management's specialist is separate and distinct from a service auditor's specialist as described in
paragraph .37 of AT-C section 205 and paragraph 2.176 of this guide.
      All AU-C sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.


©2022, AICPA                                                                           AAG-SOP 2.11
34      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          2.12 In some situations, service organization management engages a man-
     agement's specialist to provide information about the operation of controls that
     will assist management in enhancing the effectiveness of the service organiza-
     tion's controls. Determining whether management's specialist is also a subser-
     vice organization is not always clear cut. Factors that may be useful to man-
     agement and the service auditor when determining whether a management's
     specialist is also a subservice organization include the following:

               • Significance of management's specialist services. When the ser-
                 vices provided by a management's specialist include controls (such
                     as remediation of identified vulnerabilities in the service organi-
                     zation's key IT infrastructure when the specialist has been en-
                     gaged to provide software vulnerability scanning services) that
                     are necessary, in combination with the service organization's con-
                     trols, to provide reasonable assurance that the service organiza-
                     tion's service commitments and system requirements are achieved
                     based on the applicable trust services criteria, the management's
                     specialist is likely to be considered a subservice organization.
               •     Regularity of services being provided. A management's specialist
                     engaged to perform services on a regular rather than an ad hoc
                     basis is more likely to be considered a subservice organization.
     Regardless of whether management's specialist is considered a subservice or-
     ganization, management is responsible for oversight of the specialist's work.
          2.13 If the management's specialist is a subservice organization, the ser-
     vice organization's description of its system would include the information set
     forth in description criterion DC7 presented in DC section 200, 2018 Descrip-
     tion Criteria for a Description of a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2®
     Report (With Revised Implementation Guidance — 2022).4 That information
     varies depending on whether the inclusive or carve-out method is used with
     respect to the subservice organization.

     Considerations in Determining Whether to Use the Inclusive or
     Carve-Out Method
          2.14 If the service organization uses a subservice organization, service
     organization management is responsible for determining whether to use the
     carve-out or inclusive method when addressing the subservice organization in
     the description of the system. Service organization management may need as-
     sistance from the service auditor to understand the differences between the two
     methods and the implications that arise from the choice of one method over the
     other. The two methods are defined as follows:

               • Carve-out method. Method of addressing the services provided by
                 a subservice organization in which the components of the sub-
                     service organization's system used to provide the services to the
                     service organization are excluded from the description of the ser-
                     vice organization's system and from the scope of the examination.
                     However, the description identifies
                          — the nature of the services performed by the subservice
                            organization;


        4   All DC sections can be found in AICPA Description Criteria.


AAG-SOP 2.12                                                              ©2022, AICPA
                 Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                         35
                 —   the types of controls expected to be performed at the sub-
                     service organization that are necessary, in combination
                     with controls at the service organization, to provide rea-
                     sonable assurance that the service organization's service
                     commitments and system requirements were achieved;
                     and
                 —   the controls at the service organization used to mon-
                     itor the effectiveness of the subservice organization's
                     controls.

        • Inclusive method. Method of addressing the services provided by
          a subservice organization in which the description of the service
             organization's system includes a description of
                 —   the nature of the services provided by the subservice or-
                     ganization;
                 —   the components of the subservice organization's system
                     used to provide services to the service organization, in-
                     cluding the subservice organization's controls that are
                     necessary, in combination with controls at the service or-
                     ganization, to provide reasonable assurance that the ser-
                     vice organization's service commitments and system re-
                     quirements were achieved; and
                 —   the controls at the service organization used to mon-
                     itor the effectiveness of the subservice organization's
                     controls.
            Note that when using the inclusive method, controls at the subser-
            vice organization are subject to the service auditor's examination
            procedures. Because the subservice organization's system compo-
            nents are included in the description, those components are in-
            cluded in the scope of the examination.
    2.15 When a service organization uses multiple subservice organizations,
it may prepare its description using the carve-out method for one or more sub-
service organizations and the inclusive method for others.
    2.16 An inclusive report generally is most useful in the following circum-
stances:
        • The
           sive.
                 services provided by the subservice organization are exten-

        • Anottype  1 or type 2 report that meets the needs of report users is
                available from the subservice organization.
        • Information     about the subservice organization is not readily avail-
           able from other sources.
    2.17 Although the inclusive method provides more information for report
users than the carve-out method, the inclusive method would not be appro-
priate in situations in which the service auditor is not independent of both
the service organization and the subservice organization because they are both
responsible parties under this method. Independence is discussed further in
paragraph 2.43.
   2.18 Examples of circumstances in which the use of the carve-out method
may be the most practical approach include the following:

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 2.18
36      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

             a. The challenges entailed in implementing the inclusive method,
                which are described in paragraphs 2.101–.102, are sufficiently oner-
                ous that it is not practical to use the inclusive method.
             b. A service auditor's report on the subservice organization that meets
                the needs of report users is available. (Management of the service
                organization may need to work with the subservice organization to
                obtain authorization to redistribute the subservice organization's
                SOC 2 report or establish a process by which the subservice orga-
                nization distributes a copy of its SOC 2 report to the service orga-
                nization's report users.)
             c. The service organization is unable to obtain a contractual or other
                commitment from the subservice organization regarding its will-
                ingness to be included in the SOC 2 examination.
          2.19 In some cases, the subservice organization's services and controls
     have a pervasive effect on the service organization's system. In these circum-
     stances, it is important that management and the service auditor consider
     whether the use of the carve-out method may result in a description of the ser-
     vice organization's system that is so limited that it may be misleading to the in-
     tended users of the report. In such situations, the service organization's system
     alone may not be an appropriate subject matter. Examples of circumstances
     in which a SOC 2 report that uses the carve-out method may be misleading
     include the following:

             • Ausers
                  significant portion of the system used to provide services to
                      is operated by the subservice organization.
             • ments and systemofrequirements
                The  achievement      the service organization's service commit-
                                                  depends primarily on controls
                  performed by the subservice organization.
             •    It is unlikely that users of the SOC 2 report would be able to obtain
                  information about the design and, in a type 2 examination, the
                  operating effectiveness of controls at the subservice organization
                  through other means.

     Considerations in the Identiﬁcation of Complementary Subservice
     Organization Controls
         2.20 As discussed earlier, a vendor is considered a subservice organization
     when controls performed by the subservice organization are necessary, in com-
     bination with the service organization's controls, to provide reasonable assur-
     ance that the service organization's service commitments and system require-
     ments can be achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria. When the
     inclusive method is used, management would describe those controls in the sys-
     tem description with the assistance of the subservice organization. When the
     carve-out method is used, however, service organization management would
     disclose only the types of controls the subservice organization is expected to
     implement. These controls are referred to as complementary subservice organi-
     zation controls (CSOCs).
         2.21 Examples of the types of CSOCs the subservice organization is ex-
     pected to have implemented may include the following:

             • Controls relevant to the completeness, accuracy, and timeliness of
               transaction processing on behalf of the service organization

AAG-SOP 2.19                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                         37
        • Controls  relevant to the completeness, accuracy, and timeliness of
          specified reports provided to and used by the service organization
        • Logical  access controls relevant to the processing performed for
          the service organization
        • Controls  over the procedures to detect and respond to potential
          system incidents
        • The  processes in place to communicate significant system inci-
          dents and deviations in the effectiveness of controls to service or-
             ganization management
        •    The risk assessment process and the policies and procedures im-
             plemented to mitigate those risks
        •    Activities such as internal audit procedures or quality control re-
             views that the subservice organization has in place to monitor the
             effectiveness of its control activities

Service organization management may request the service auditor's assistance
when determining how to present the CSOCs in the description of the system.
In this case, the service auditor may provide examples of CSOC disclosures
made by others and make recommendations to improve the presentation of the
CSOCs in the description. The ultimate decision about what to disclose, how-
ever, rests with service organization management.

     2.22 Chapter 3, "Performing the SOC 2 Examination," discusses the ser-
vice auditor's responsibilities for obtaining an understanding of CSOCs in the
examination and for determining whether disclosures about CSOCs in the de-
scription are presented in accordance with the description criteria.

Considerations in Identifying Complementary User Entity Controls and
User Entity Responsibilities
     2.23 Usually, user entities must perform specific activities to benefit from
the services of a service organization. Such activities may include specifying
the configuration of services to be provided, submitting authorized input for
processing, managing user entity employee access to data, and reviewing the
outputs of processing. These activities may be specified in agreements between
the user entity and the service organization, user manuals, and other commu-
nications. Most of these activities are needed for the user entity to derive value
from the services but do not affect the ability of the service organization to
achieve its service commitments and system requirements. This guide refers
to such activities as user entity responsibilities.

    2.24 In contrast, when a service organization's controls cannot provide
reasonable assurance that its service commitments and system requirements
would be achieved without the user entity performing certain controls in a
defined manner, those controls are referred to as complementary user entity
controls (CUECs). Service organization management expects the user entity to
implement CUECs completely and accurately in a timely manner.

     2.25 In most circumstances, a service organization's controls alone are
sufficient to enable the achievement of its service commitments or system re-
quirements. This is because, when making its service commitments, manage-
ment only makes commitments that it is able to control. Similarly, system re-
quirements are generally derived only from those commitments that are the

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 2.25
38       SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     service organization's responsibility. Therefore, management typically does not
     identify CUECs to be implemented by user entities.
          2.26 For example, when considering the achievement of a service com-
     mitment to provision user credentials based on instructions from the user en-
     tity, service organization management may consider the controls that would
     be necessary based on trust services criterion CC6.2, Prior to issuing system
     credentials and granting system access, the entity registers and authorizes new
     internal and external users whose access is administered by the entity. For those
     users whose access is administered by the entity, user system credentials are re-
     moved when user access is no longer authorized. Trust services criterion CC6.2
     requires only that the system register a user (a user identified by the user entity
     as an authorized user) and issue system credentials to that user after the user
     entity supplies the service organization with a list of authorized users. If the
     user entity supplies the service organization with a list of authorized users and
     inadvertently includes employees who should not have access, the service orga-
     nization has still met both trust services criterion CC6.2 and its service commit-
     ment to the user entity. Because providing the service organization with a list
     of authorized users is necessary for the user entity to benefit from the services
     provided by the service organization, it is a user entity responsibility. However,
     because the service organization's controls provide reasonable assurance that
     the service organization's service commitments and system requirements are
     achieved based on the applicable trust services criterion without such informa-
     tion, or without such information being complete and accurate, identifying the
     authorized users and communicating that information to the service organiza-
     tion are not considered CUECs.
          2.27 In other situations, controls at the user entity may be necessary for
     the service organization's controls to provide reasonable assurance that the
     service organization's service commitments and system requirements would be
     achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria. Consider, for example,
     controls relevant to trust services criterion CC6.4, The entity restricts physi-
     cal access to facilities and protected information assets (for example, data cen-
     ter facilities, backup media storage, and other sensitive locations) to authorized
     personnel to achieve the entity's objectives. A service organization may install
     portions of its infrastructure at a user entity (for example, servers installed at
     user entity data centers to support the transmission of files between the user
     entity and the service organization). In these circumstances, the user entity
     needs to implement physical access controls to protect the components of the
     service organization's system located at the user entity.
          2.28 Although there is no prescribed format for presenting CUECs in the
     system description, they are typically included at the end of the system descrip-
     tion or at the end of the section that includes the service auditor's description of
     tests of controls and results and are related to specific trust services criteria. To
     assist report users in understanding their role in the system, CUECs may also
     be associated with the specific service commitments or system requirements to
     which they relate.

     Considerations in Identifying Controls That a Subservice Organization
     Expects the Service Organization to Implement
         2.29 In addition to the controls that the service organization expects the
     subservice organization to implement (CSOCs), there may be activities that a
     subservice organization expects the service organization, as a user entity, to

AAG-SOP 2.26                                                            ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                         39
perform for the subservice organization's controls to be effective. When a sub-
service organization undergoes a SOC 2 examination, such activities may be
identified in the section of the service organization's description that describes
CUECs. This would be the case when the subservice organization's controls
cannot provide reasonable assurance that its commitments to the service or-
ganization (user entity) would be achieved without the service organization
performing certain controls in a defined manner. For example, a service orga-
nization may outsource aspects of its technology infrastructure to a subservice
organization that maintains its servers in the service organization's data cen-
ter facilities. In this situation, service organization management may find the
following CUEC identified in the SOC 2 report obtained from the subservice
organization:
         User entities should have controls in place to restrict physical access
         to data center facilities to authorized user entity personnel.

    2.30 To address that CUEC, service organization management might in-
clude in its description the following controls:

        • Access   to the data center requires a documented access request
           form and manager approval prior to access being provisioned.
        • Aployees
             termination checklist is completed and access is revoked for em-
                    within 24 hours as part of the termination process.
        •  Access to  the data center is reviewed quarterly by management.
        • Persons   are identified and authenticated through the badging ac-
           cess system prior to accessing the data center.

     2.31 In addition to the CUECs, the subservice organization may also iden-
tify user entity responsibilities that should be considered by the service orga-
nization to effectively use the subservice organization's system but that do not
affect the subservice organization's ability to achieve its commitments to the
service organization. Such activities may also be described in user documenta-
tion published by the subservice organization or in the agreement between the
service organization and subservice organization.

Management Responsibilities During the Examination
    2.32 During the SOC 2 examination, service organization management is
responsible for the following:

        • Preparing  a description of the service organization's system, in-
          cluding the completeness, accuracy, and method of presentation of
             the description
        •    Providing a written assertion that accompanies the description of
             the service organization's system, both of which will be provided
             to report users
        •    Identifying the risks that threaten the service organization's
             achievement of its service commitments and system requirements
             stated in the description
        •    Designing, implementing, and documenting controls that are suit-
             ably designed and operating effectively to provide reasonable as-
             surance that the service commitments and system requirements
             will be achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria
        •    Having a reasonable basis for its assertion

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 2.32
40      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

             • Ifdirect
                    the service auditor plans to use internal auditors to provide
                        assistance, providing the service auditor with written ac-
                  knowledgment that internal auditors providing direct assistance
                  to the service auditor will be allowed to follow the service auditor's
                  instructions and that the service organization will not intervene
                  in the work the internal auditors perform for the service auditor
             •    Providing the service auditor with the following:
                      — Access to all information, such as records, documentation,
                        service-level agreements, and internal audit or other re-
                        ports, that management is aware of and that is relevant
                        to the engagement
                      — Access to additional information that the service auditor
                        may request from management for purposes of the en-
                        gagement
                      — Unrestricted access to personnel within the service orga-
                        nization from whom the service auditor determines it is
                        necessary to obtain evidence relevant to the SOC 2 exam-
                        ination

             • Disclosing to the service auditor the following:
                      — Incidents of noncompliance with laws and regulations,
                        fraud, or uncorrected misstatements that are clearly not
                        trivial and that may affect one or more user entities and
                        whether such incidents have been communicated appro-
                        priately to affected user entities
                      — Knowledge of any actual, suspected, or alleged fraud or
                        noncompliance with laws and regulations affecting the
                        description, suitability of design of controls, or, in a type
                        2 examination, operating effectiveness of controls
                      — All deficiencies in the design of controls of which manage-
                        ment is aware
                      — All instances in which controls have not operated as de-
                        scribed
                      — All identified system incidents that were the result of
                        controls that were not suitably designed or operating ef-
                        fectively or resulted in a significant impairment of the
                        service organization's achievement of its service commit-
                        ments and system requirements as of the date of the de-
                        scription (for a type 1 examination) or during the period
                        of time covered by the description (for a type 2 exami-
                        nation)
          2.33 Management acknowledges these responsibilities in an engagement
     letter or other suitable form of written communication. Further information
     about management's responsibilities in the SOC 2 examination can be found
     on the AICPA website.
          2.34 In a SOC 2 examination in which the service organization uses the
     services of a subservice organization and management elects to use the inclu-
     sive method to present certain information about the services provided by the
     subservice organization, subservice organization management is also respon-
     sible for many of the matters described in paragraph 2.32 as they relate to the

AAG-SOP 2.33                                                          ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                        41
subservice organization. Accordingly, during planning, the service auditor de-
termines, with the assistance of service organization management, whether it
will be possible to obtain (a) an assertion from subservice organization man-
agement and (b) evidence that supports the service auditor's opinion on the
subservice organization's description of its system, the suitability of design of
controls, and in a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness of the subser-
vice organization's controls (including written representations from manage-
ment of the subservice organization). If subservice organization management
will not provide a written assertion and appropriate written representations,
service organization management will be unable to use the inclusive method
but may be able to use the carve-out method. Additional guidance on the use of
the inclusive method is provided beginning in paragraph 2.101.

Management’s Responsibilities During Engagement Completion
   2.35 The responsibilities of management of the service organization to-
ward the end of the engagement include the following:

        • Modifying the description, if appropriate (Chapter 4, "Forming the
          Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor's Report," describes a
             few situations in which the service auditor would generally rec-
             ommend that management modify the description.)
        •    Modifying management's written assertion, if appropriate (See
             discussion beginning at paragraph 3.257.)
        •    Providing the service auditor with written representations (See
             discussion beginning at paragraph 3.229.)
        •    Disclosing to the service auditor any known events, subsequent to
             the period covered by the description of the service organization's
             system, up to the date of the service auditor's report, that would
             have a material effect on the description, suitability of design of
             controls, and in a type 2 engagement, operating effectiveness of
             controls (See discussion beginning at paragraph 3.245.)


Responsibilities of the Service Auditor
    2.36 During engagement acceptance and planning, the service auditor is
responsible for the following:

        • Determining   whether to accept or continue an engagement for a
          particular client. In making this determination, the service audi-
             tor needs to consider whether the preconditions for accepting an
             examination as discussed in paragraphs .26–.27 of AT-C section
             105 have been met (see paragraph 2.51)
        •    Agreeing on the terms of the engagement with service organiza-
             tion management, including establishing an understanding about
             the responsibilities of management and the service auditor (see
             paragraph 2.76)
        •    Reaching an understanding with management regarding manage-
             ment's willingness and ability to provide a written assertion at the
             conclusion of the examination (see paragraph 2.72)
        •    Establishing an overall strategy for the examination that sets the
             scope, timing, and direction of the engagement and guides the de-
             velopment of the engagement plan, including the consideration of

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 2.36
42       SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                     materiality and the identification of the risks of material misstate-
                     ment (see paragraph 2.97)
               •     Performing procedures to assess the risk of material misstate-
                     ment, including obtaining an understanding of the service orga-
                     nization's system and how the system controls were designed, im-
                     plemented, and operated to provide reasonable assurance that the
                     service organization's service commitments and system require-
                     ments are achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria
                     (see paragraph 2.108)


     Engagement Acceptance and Continuance
          2.37 With respect to the acceptance and continuance of client relation-
     ships and specific engagements, paragraph .27 of QM section 10A, A Firm's
     System of Quality Control,5 states that the firm should establish policies and
     procedures for the acceptance and continuance of client relationships and spe-
     cific engagements that are designed to provide the firm with reasonable as-
     surance that it will undertake or continue relationships and engagements only
     when the firm
               a. is competent to perform the examination and has the capabilities,
                  including time and resources, to do so;
               b. can comply with legal and relevant ethical requirements; and
               c. has considered the integrity of the client and does not have infor-
                  mation that would lead it to conclude that the client lacks integrity.
          2.38 The quality control requirements for competence and ethical behav-
     ior are reiterated in paragraph .29 of AT-C section 105, which indicates that
     the service auditor should accept or continue a SOC 2 examination only when
     the service auditor
               a. has no reason to believe that relevant ethical requirements, includ-
                  ing independence, will not be satisfied.
               b. is satisfied that those persons who are performing the engagement
                  collectively have the appropriate competence and capabilities. (See
                  paragraph 2.46.)
               c. has determined that the engagement to be performed meets all the
                  preconditions for an attestation engagement. (See paragraph 2.51.)
               d. has reached a common understanding with the engaging party6 of
                  the terms of the engagement, including the service auditor's report-
                  ing responsibilities. (Chapter 4 discusses reporting in a SOC 2 ex-
                  amination.)
         2.39 According to paragraph .A12 of QM section 10A, matters to consider
     when evaluating the integrity of a client include the identity and business rep-
     utation of the principal owners of the service organization, key service organi-
     zation management, and those charged with governance.


         5  All QM sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.
         6   The engaging party is the party or parties that engage the service auditor to perform the
     examination. In the examination discussed in this guide, service organization management is often,
     but not always, the engaging party.


AAG-SOP 2.37                                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                     Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                      43
     2.40 The service auditor may also consider whether management has re-
alistic expectations about the examination or whether the service organiza-
tion may experience significant negative consequences if the service auditor's
opinion is qualified because of a lack of appropriate controls and related doc-
umentation. In such situations, the service auditor may choose to decline the
engagement.


Independence
     2.41 Independence, as defined by the AICPA Code of Professional Conduct
(code), is required for examination-level engagements to report on controls at a
service organization. The independence assessment process addresses matters
such as scope of services, fee arrangements, firm and individual financial re-
lationships, firm business relationships, and alumni and familial relationships
with the client and client personnel.
     2.42 The "Independence Rule" (ET sec. 1.200.001)7 of the AICPA Code
of Professional Conduct establishes independence requirements for attesta-
tion engagements. The "Independence Standards for Engagements Performed
in Accordance With Statements on Standards for Attestation Engagements"
subtopic (ET sec. 1.297) of the "Independence Rule" establishes independence
requirements for a service auditor who provides services under the attestation
standards. In addition, the "Conceptual Framework Approach" subtopic (ET
sec. 1.210) of the "Independence Rule" discusses threats to independence not
specifically detailed elsewhere. The "Independence Rule" is followed by inter-
pretations of the rule that assist the service auditor in assessing independence.
The code specifies that, in some circumstances, no safeguards can reduce an in-
dependence threat to an acceptable level. For example, the code specifies that
a covered member may not own even an immaterial direct financial interest in
an attest client because there is no safeguard to reduce the self-interest threat
to an acceptable level. A member may not use the conceptual framework to
overcome this prohibition or any other prohibition or requirement in an inde-
pendence interpretation.
    2.43 When performing engagements in accordance with the attestation
standards, in which independence is required, the service auditor needs to be
independent with respect to the responsible party (or parties), as defined in
those standards. If the service organization uses a subservice organization, and
management elects to use the inclusive method to present certain information
about the subservice organization in its description of the service organization's
system, subservice organization management is also a responsible party. Con-
sequently, in accordance with paragraph .26 of AT-C section 105, the service
auditor should also be independent of the subservice organization. The service
auditor need not be independent of each user entity of the service organization.
    2.44 When the service auditor is not independent but is required by law or
regulation to accept the engagement, paragraph .06 of AT-C section 205 states
that the service auditor should disclaim an opinion and should specifically state
that the service auditor is not independent. The service auditor is neither re-
quired to provide, nor precluded from providing, the reasons for the lack of in-
dependence; however, if the service auditor chooses to provide the reasons for


   7   All ET sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.


©2022, AICPA                                                           AAG-SOP 2.44
44      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     the lack of independence, the service auditor should include all the reasons
     therefor.

     IT Services
          2.45 The AICPA code describes situations in which there are threats to
     independence when a practitioner is engaged to design, develop, or implement
     information systems for an attest client. This guidance may be particularly rel-
     evant in engagements where the subject matter is systems and controls such
     as a SOC 2 engagement. For example, a service organization may implement
     a governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) tool that includes functionality sup-
     porting the identification of threats and vulnerabilities, monitoring the imple-
     mentation of key software settings, monitoring the effectiveness of automated
     controls, and accumulating, recording, and maintaining evidence of the oper-
     ation of controls. If the service organization asks the service auditor for as-
     sistance with the design, implementation, or integration of the GRC tool, the
     service auditor should assess whether self-review and management participa-
     tion threats to the service auditor's independence exist based on the "Indepen-
     dence Standards for Engagements Performed in Accordance With Statements
     on Standards for Attestation Engagements" subtopic. Independence is further
     discussed in paragraph 2.41.


     Competence of Engagement Team Members
         2.46 Chapter 1, "Introduction and Background," of this guide discusses
     quality in the SOC 2 examination. Maintaining appropriate quality in the en-
     gagement involves having the work performed by engagement team members
     who have the appropriate competence and capabilities. For that reason, as dis-
     cussed in paragraph 2.37, the service auditor should not accept the SOC 2
     examination unless it has been determined that the individuals who would
     perform the engagement have the appropriate competence and capabilities to
     perform it.
          2.47 When considering the competence and capabilities of engagement
     team members, paragraph .34 of AT-C section 105 indicates that the engage-
     ment partner should be satisfied that the team and any service auditor's ex-
     ternal specialists assigned to the engagement collectively have the appropri-
     ate competence or capabilities. Such competencies and capabilities include the
     following:
             • An  understanding, or the ability to obtain an understanding, of
               systems used to provide services, including operating and security
                   of such systems, gained either through experience with engage-
                   ments of a similar nature and complexity or through appropriate
                   training and participation
             •     Knowledge of the service organization's industry and business, in-
                   cluding whether the industry in which the service organization
                   operates is subject to specific types of or unusual security risks
             •     An understanding of business processes, risks, and controls
             •     Knowledge of relevant IT systems and technology, such as CPUs,
                   networking, firewalls or firewall techniques, security protocols, op-
                   erating systems, and databases
             •     Knowledge of any uncommon technologies or industry-specific
                   technologies used by the service organization

AAG-SOP 2.45                                                          ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                          45
        • An understanding of IT processes and controls, such as the man-
          agement of operating systems, networking, and virtualization
             software and related security techniques; security principles and
             concepts; software development; and incident management and
             information risk management
        •    Experience with evaluating the suitability of design and operating
             effectiveness of controls relevant to security, availability, process-
             ing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy
        •    An understanding of professional standards and the ability to ap-
             ply professional skepticism and judgment in the examination
        •    An understanding of the description criteria and trust services
             criteria used in the engagement
        •    An understanding of legal and regulatory requirements relevant
             to the examination
     2.48 In addition, in accordance with paragraph .34 of AT-C section 105,
the engagement partner should be satisfied that team members are informed
of their responsibilities, including the objectives of the procedures that they
are to perform and matters that may affect the nature, timing, and extent of
such procedures. The engagement partner should also be satisfied that engage-
ment team members have been directed to bring to the partner's attention any
significant questions raised during the engagement.
    2.49 The engagement partner may decide to supplement the knowledge
and skills of the engagement team with the use of specialists. Planning to use
the work of a service auditor's specialist is discussed in paragraph 2.176.
     2.50 As a member of the engagement team, the engagement partner also
needs to have appropriate competence and capabilities to issue an appropriate
service auditor's report based on the engagement's particular circumstances.
In accordance with paragraph .35 of AT-C section 105, the engagement partner
also takes responsibility for overall quality on each engagement, which includes
responsibility for the following:
        a. Appropriate procedures being performed regarding the acceptance
           and continuance of client relationships and engagements
        b. The engagement being planned and performed (including appro-
           priate direction and supervision) to comply with professional stan-
           dards and applicable legal and regulatory requirements
        c. Reviews being performed in accordance with the firm's review poli-
           cies and procedures and reviewing the engagement documentation
           on or before the date of the service auditor's report
        d. Appropriate engagement documentation being maintained to pro-
           vide evidence of achievement of the service auditor's objectives and
           that the engagement was performed in accordance with the attes-
           tation standards and relevant legal and regulatory requirements
        e. Appropriate consultation being undertaken by the engagement
           team on difficult or contentious matters


Preconditions of a SOC 2 Engagement
    2.51 In accordance with paragraph .29 of AT-C section 105, the service
auditor should accept or continue an engagement to examine and report on

©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP 2.51
46      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     controls at a service organization only if the preconditions for an attestation
     engagement identified in paragraphs .26–.27 of AT-C section 105 are met:
             a. The service auditor is independent in accordance with the attesta-
                 tion standards. (See paragraph 2.41.)
             b. Management accepts responsibility for the
                        i. preparation of the description of the service organization's
                           system in accordance with the description criteria and
                       ii. suitability of design of controls and the operating effective-
                           ness of controls to provide reasonable assurance that the
                           service organization's service commitments and system re-
                           quirements were achieved.
             c. The subject matters of the SOC 2 examination are appropriate. (The
                 subject matters of SOC 2 examinations are discussed beginning at
                 paragraph 1.05; determining whether the subject matters are ap-
                 propriate is discussed beginning at paragraph 2.52.)
             d. The criteria used to prepare and evaluate the description and con-
                 trols are both suitable and available to users of the report. (The
                 suitability and availability of both the description criteria and the
                 trust services criteria are discussed at paragraphs 1.42 and 1.47;
                 the appropriateness of the principal service commitments and sys-
                 tem requirements stated in the description is discussed beginning
                 at paragraph 2.66.)
             e. The service auditor expects to be able to obtain the evidence needed
                 to arrive at the opinion on the description, suitability of design of
                 controls, and in a type 2 examination, operating effectiveness of con-
                 trols and will have
                        i. access to all information relevant to the engagement;
                       ii. access to additional information that the service auditor
                           may request; and
                      iii. unrestricted access to service organization personnel.
              f. The service auditor's opinion, in a form appropriate to the engage-
                 ment, is to be contained in the service auditor's written examination
                 report.

     Determining Whether the Subject Matter Is Appropriate for
     the SOC 2 Examination
          2.52 The information contained in the description of a service organiza-
     tion's system, the suitability of design of controls, and in a type 2 examination,
     the operating effectiveness of the controls, which are the subject matters of
     a SOC 2 examination, are relevant to user entities, business partners, and the
     other parties specified in the SOC 2 report. Consequently, those subject matters
     are usually appropriate for a SOC 2 examination. However, the determination
     of the appropriateness of the subject matters, as discussed further later, may be
     affected in certain situations. In such situations, in accordance with paragraph
     .27 of AT-C section 105, the service auditor should determine the appropriate-
     ness of the subject matter before accepting the engagement.
         2.53 Paragraph .A39 of AT-C section 105 states that subject matter is ap-
     propriate if it is (a) identifiable and capable of consistent measurement or eval-
     uation against the criteria and (b) can be subjected to procedures for obtaining

AAG-SOP 2.52                                                           ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                         47
sufficient appropriate evidence to support an opinion. In a SOC 2 examination,
consideration of whether the subject matter is appropriate involves consider-
ation of whether the system used to provide the services is identifiable. For
instance, the boundaries of a system addressed by a SOC 2 examination may
not be as clear as the boundaries of a financial reporting system addressed by
a SOC 1 examination; therefore, before accepting a SOC 2 examination, the
service auditor and management need to agree on the system being reported
on and its boundaries. In doing so, management and the service auditor con-
sider the relationship between the boundaries of each of the components of the
system used to provide the services, as discussed in paragraph 1.25.
     2.54 In considering whether to accept a type 2 SOC 2 engagement, in ac-
cordance with paragraph .27 of AT-C section 105, the service auditor should
also consider whether sufficient evidence of the effective operations of controls
is likely to be available for the period of time covered by the examination. If
the period of time is too short, sufficient appropriate evidence may not be avail-
able and the subject matter may not be appropriate. Consider the following
examples:

        • Service organization management wishes to engage the service
          auditor to perform a type 2 examination for a period of less than
             two months. In this situation, the service auditor may conclude
             that it is unlikely that sufficient appropriate evidence can be ob-
             tained to support an opinion on design and operating effectiveness
             of controls; therefore, the subject matter would not be appropriate
             for the examination.
        •    Service organization management requests a SOC 2 report for a
             period that covers nine months. In this situation, although there
             may be a risk that annual controls do not operate during the ex-
             amination period, the service auditor may conclude that it is likely
             that sufficient appropriate evidence can be obtained to support an
             opinion on design and operating effectiveness of controls. (Para-
             graph 3.176 provides guidance for situations in which an annual
             control did not operate during the period covered by the exami-
             nation.)
     2.55 When the subject matter of the engagement relates to only one part
of a broader subject matter, paragraph .A43 of AT-C section 105 indicates that
it may be appropriate for the service auditor to consider whether information
about the aspect that the service auditor is asked to examine is likely to meet
the information needs of intended users. In this case, the service auditor may
question accepting the engagement. Factors to consider in this consideration
include the functions performed by the system within the context of how user
entities make use of the services, the extent of the use of subservice organi-
zations and the importance and complexity of their services, how information
about subservice organizations will be presented in the description of the ser-
vice organization's system (inclusive or carve-out method), and the relevance
to the system of the trust services category or categories included within the
scope of the examination to the information needs of user entities.
     2.56 For example, assume a service organization functions primarily as
an intermediary between user entities and a subservice organization and per-
forms few or no functions related to the services it provides them. If the ser-
vice organization's controls do not materially contribute to the achievement of
the subservice organization's service commitments and system requirements, a

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 2.56
48       SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     report on that service organization's controls that carves out the subservice
     organization is unlikely to meet the information needs of intended users and
     would, consequently, not be an appropriate subject matter. In contrast, assume
     a service organization that provides fleet management services including pro-
     viding vehicles, maintenance of those vehicles, fuel services, and carbon foot-
     print reporting wants an examination that addresses only the processing in-
     tegrity of its carbon footprint reporting services. When evaluating whether this
     represents an appropriate subject matter, the service auditor would consider
     whether the requested engagement is likely to meet the information needs
     of the intended users of the report. If the service auditor concludes that the
     boundaries of the system related to carbon footprint reporting are identifiable
     and the services within those boundaries can be subject to procedures to obtain
     sufficient appropriate evidence, the service auditor may be able to conclude
     that the carbon footprint reporting services are an appropriate subject matter.
     If the service auditor concludes that the requested engagement is likely to meet
     the information needs of only a subset of the intended users and, consequently,
     the subject matters of the report are appropriate only for that subset of users,
     the service auditor may conclude that the engagement may be accepted with
     use of the report restricted to that subset of users.

         2.57 The service auditor may also consider whether the intended users of
     the report are likely to understand the nature of the examination, the criteria
     used, and the tests performed and results thereof (for example, acceptable devi-
     ation rates or inherent limitations on the effectiveness of controls). If intended
     users are unlikely to understand that information, a greater potential exists for
     them to misunderstand the report; in that case, the service auditor may decide
     not to accept the examination.

     Determining Whether Service Organization Management Is
     Likely to Have a Reasonable Basis for Its Assertion
          2.58 Service organization management is responsible for having a reason-
     able basis for its assertion about the description, suitability of design of controls
     and, in a type 2 engagement, operating effectiveness of controls stated therein.
     Furthermore, because management's assertion generally addresses the suit-
     ability of design of controls and, in a type 2 examination, the operating effec-
     tiveness of controls over a period of time, management's basis for its asser-
     tion covers the same time frame. Having a reasonable basis necessitates the
     performance of risk assessment, the implementation of effective processes and
     controls to mitigate identified risks, and the performance of controls and other
     activities to monitor the effectiveness of such controls. Also inherent is the as-
     sumption that service organization management possesses the necessary skills
     and competence to perform these functions. Such skills and competence are nec-
     essary to enable management to oversee the work of vendors, management's
     specialists, and other third parties who assist management with the effective
     operation of internal control. The procedures performed by the service auditor
     during a type 1 or type 2 examination are not considered a basis for manage-
     ment's assertion because the service auditor is not part of the service organiza-
     tion's internal control. In accordance with paragraph .10 of AT-C section 205,
     the service auditor should use professional judgment in determining whether
     management has a reasonable basis for making its assertion.

         2.59 AT-C section 205 does not include specific requirements for the ser-
     vice auditor to perform procedures to determine whether management has a

AAG-SOP 2.57                                                            ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                        49
reasonable basis for its assertion. Because of the relationship between (a) the
evaluation of the suitability of design of controls and, in a type 2 examination,
the operating effectiveness of controls and (b) monitoring, the service auditor
ordinarily discusses the basis for its assertion with management prior to en-
gagement acceptance. This assists the service auditor in determining whether
the basis appears reasonable for the size and complexity of the service organi-
zation and whether the service auditor expects to be able to obtain sufficient
appropriate evidence to arrive at the opinion, which is also a precondition of
the examination.
     2.60 Management's basis for its assertion usually relies heavily on mon-
itoring of controls. Such monitoring activities typically include ongoing activ-
ities, separate evaluations, or a combination of the two. Ongoing monitoring
activities are ordinarily built into the normal recurring activities of the ser-
vice organization. Monitoring activities are particularly important because the
service organization frequently interacts with third parties such as user enti-
ties, business partners, subservice organizations, vendors, and others who have
access to the service organization's system or otherwise transmit information
back and forth between, or on behalf of, the service organization. Therefore, it
is important for service organization management to assess the risks arising
from interactions with those parties, particularly when they operate controls
necessary, in combination with the service organization's controls, to provide
reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commitments and
system requirements are achieved.
     2.61 If service organization management determines the risks associated
with third parties such as user entities, business partners, subservice organi-
zations, vendors, and others with whom the service organization interacts are
likely to be material to the service organization's achievement of its service
commitments and system requirements (for example, because of the nature of
those parties' access to the system or because of the controls they operate on
behalf of the service organization), monitoring controls are necessary to enable
management to determine whether the processes and controls performed by
those users effectively address the identified risks. Such monitoring controls
may include a combination of the following:

        • Testing controls at the third party by members of the service or-
          ganization's internal audit function
        • Reviewing and reconciling output reports
        • Holding  periodic discussions with the third-party personnel and
          evaluating the third party's performance against established
             service-level objectives and agreements
        •    Making site visits to the third party
        •    Inspecting a type 2 SOC 2 report on the subservice organization's
             or business partner's system
        •    Monitoring external communications, such as complaints from
             user entities relevant to the services performed by the third party
    2.62 When such monitoring activities do not exist or appear inadequate,
it may be difficult for service organization management to demonstrate that it
has a reasonable basis for its assertion.
   2.63 Service organization management usually documents the assess-
ment in a variety of ways, including through the use of policy manuals,

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 2.63
50      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     narratives, flowcharts, decision tables, procedural write-ups, or questionnaires.
     The nature and extent of documentation usually varies, depending on the size
     and complexity of the service organization and its monitoring activities.
         2.64 If the service auditor believes that the subject matter is not appropri-
     ate because management does not have a reasonable basis for its assertion, or
     that sufficient appropriate evidence to support the basis is unlikely to be avail-
     able, the service auditor should not accept or continue the engagement based
     on the guidance in paragraph .27 of AT-C section 105.

     Assessing the Suitability and Availability of Criteria
          2.65 As discussed in chapter 1, two distinct sets of criteria are used in
     the SOC 2 examination: description criteria and trust services criteria. The
     description criteria in DC section 200 and the trust services criteria in TSP
     section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing
     Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy (With Revised Points of Focus — 2022),8
     were promulgated by the Assurance Services Executive Committee, which is
     designated by the Council of the AICPA under the AICPA Code of Professional
     Conduct to issue measurement criteria. Therefore, such criteria are considered
     suitable for use in a SOC 2 examination. Because the criteria are published by
     the AICPA and made available to the public, they are also considered available
     to report users. Therefore, they meet the definition in paragraph .27bii of AT-
     C section 105 for criteria that are both suitable and available for use in an
     attestation engagement.

     Determining Whether the Service Organization’s Principal
     Service Commitments and System Requirements Are Reasonable
     in the Circumstances
          2.66 As stated in chapter 1, service organization management is respon-
     sible for identifying and achieving the service commitments it makes to user
     entities as well as for the requirements of the system that will enable the ser-
     vice organization to achieve them. Management is also responsible for design-
     ing, implementing, and operating controls that provide reasonable assurance of
     achieving the service organization's service commitments and system require-
     ments.
          2.67 Principal service commitments and system requirements are those
     that are likely to be useful to support the understanding of the services pro-
     vided, the system, and the design and operation of controls by a broad range of
     SOC 2 report users. For example, it may be common for a service organization to
     make the same system availability commitment to the majority of its user en-
     tities. Because information about the availability commitments (for example,
     transaction response time, maximum hours of unscheduled outage per year)
     common to most user entities is likely to be useful to the broad range of SOC 2
     report users, those commitments would be principal service commitments; as
     such, they would be presented in the description of the system.
          2.68 In another situation, however, a service organization may make a
     different commitment about system availability to an individual user entity
     than to other user entities. That commitment would not ordinarily be consid-
     ered a principal service commitment because it is likely to be relevant only to

        8   TSP sections can be found in AICPA Trust Services Criteria.


AAG-SOP 2.64                                                              ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                         51
the individual user entity to which it was made and not to the broad range of
SOC 2 report users. Because only principal service commitments are disclosed
in the service organization's description, the individual user entity may need
to obtain additional information from the service organization regarding the
achievement of its specific availability commitment.
    2.69 Because of the close relationship between the trust services criteria
and the service organization's service commitments and system requirements,
consideration of whether the principal service commitments and system re-
quirements identified by management are appropriate for the SOC 2 examina-
tion is critical. Early evaluation can help the service auditor identify potential
risks to the successful completion of the engagement and establish a more thor-
ough understanding of the engagement scope and risks prior to engagement
acceptance.
    2.70 When considering whether the principal service commitments and
system requirements established by management are reasonable in the cir-
cumstances, the service auditor may consider the following questions:

        • Do the principal system requirements address the types of risks
          that would have a substantial likelihood of influencing the judg-
             ments made by intended users of the service organization's ser-
             vices? For example, to address cybersecurity risks to users of the
             service organization's system that are affected by logical access
             controls, management may identify a system requirement that in-
             dicates the service organization has implemented logical access
             controls to prevent or detect unauthorized access to the system.
        •    Are the principal service commitments and system requirements
             described in a level of detail that will enable report users to un-
             derstand the evaluation of controls based on the trust services cri-
             teria? For example, disclosure of a principal service commitment
             to comply with privacy laws and regulations may not be sufficient.
             Instead, a disclosure that identifies the specific privacy laws and
             regulations, such as the European Union's General Data Protec-
             tion Regulation (GDPR) may be necessary for users to understand
             the evaluation of controls, as illustrated in the next bullet.
        •    Do the principal service commitments and system requirements
             include compliance with legal requirements or contractual agree-
             ments? For example, if user entities are required by law to com-
             ply with the GDPR, these requirements are often included in the
             service-level agreements that they have with the service organi-
             zation; the service organization would likely identify service com-
             mitments to support user entities' compliance with the GDPR. The
             service organization would also identify the system requirements
             necessary to enable that compliance. When those commitments
             are important to a broad range of users, management would gen-
             erally identify them as principal service commitments and system
             requirements.
             If the service organization is required to comply with the GDPR,
             management would also generally identify a related service
             commitment and establish system requirements to support the
             achievement of that commitment. This is true whether or not the
             privacy criteria are included within the scope of the examination.
             When those commitments are important to a broad range of users,

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 2.70
52       SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                     management would generally identify them as principal service
                     commitments and system requirements.
               •     Are the principal service commitments and system requirements
                     complete? For example, in a SOC 2 examination that includes
                     processing integrity, the service auditor would expect principal
                     service commitments and system requirements to be identified
                     related to completeness, validity, accuracy, timeliness, and autho-
                     rization. An examination based on a complete set of principal ser-
                     vice commitments and system requirements can provide intended
                     users with the information they need to assess the effect of the
                     service organization's controls on the risks associated with doing
                     business with the service organization. However, the service au-
                     ditor ordinarily will not be able to determine how the service or-
                     ganization's controls specifically address the risks specific to an
                     individual intended user; accordingly, the service auditor need not
                     consider completeness from the perspective of individual intended
                     users. Instead, individual intended users are expected to assess
                     whether the principal service commitments and system require-
                     ments disclosed in the description include those that are relevant
                     to them.
          2.71 If the service auditor believes that the service commitments and sys-
     tem requirements identified by management are not appropriate for the SOC
     2 examination, the service auditor should discuss the appropriateness of the
     subject matter with management in accordance with paragraph .28 of AT-C sec-
     tion 105. It is usually helpful if management provides the service auditor with
     a draft of its principal service commitments and system requirements during
     the engagement acceptance process. If, as a result of the service auditor's ini-
     tial review, the service auditor believes that this disclosure is inadequate and
     could result in the service auditor concluding that the description would be
     materially misstated, the service auditor may request that management revise
     the disclosure. If management is unwilling to revise the disclosure of the prin-
     cipal service commitments and system requirements, the service auditor may
     refuse to accept the engagement. Chapter 3 discusses considering the disclo-
     sures that service organization management makes about its principal service
     commitments and system requirements as part of the evaluation of whether
     the description presents the system that was designed and implemented in ac-
     cordance with the description criteria. It also discusses the situation when, af-
     ter accepting the engagement, the service auditor obtains evidence that causes
     him or her to believe that the service organization's service commitments and
     system requirements are not appropriate for the examination.


     Requesting a Written Assertion and Representations
     From Service Organization Management 9
         2.72 According to paragraph .10 of AT-C section 205, the service auditor
     should request a written assertion from the responsible party that addresses


          9 As discussed in paragraph 2.43, if the service organization uses a subservice organization

     and elects the inclusive method, subservice organization management is also a responsible party and
     the guidance in this section also applies to them. If subservice organization management refuses to
     provide a written assertion, service organization management cannot use the inclusive method but
     may be able to use the carve-out method.


AAG-SOP 2.71                                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                      Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                                         53
whether (a) the description presents the system designed and implemented
in accordance with the description criteria, (b) the controls were suitably de-
signed to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service
commitments and system requirements were achieved, and (c) in a type 2 exam-
ination, the controls operated effectively to provide reasonable assurance that
the service organization's service commitments and system requirements were
achieved. The service auditor's responsibility for determining whether manage-
ment has a reasonable basis for its assertion is discussed in paragraph 2.58.
     2.73 Management's assertion is included in the SOC 2 report along with
the description and the service auditor's report. Because of the important role
that the assertion plays in the engagement, it may be useful for the service au-
ditor to provide management with an example of a written assertion prior to
engagement acceptance. However, service organization management is respon-
sible for drafting its written assertion and may word the assertion in accordance
with its practices, as long as it addresses management's conclusions about the
description and effectiveness of controls and is not materially inconsistent with
the description or the service auditor's report. Illustrative examples of man-
agement assertions are presented in appendix C-1, "Illustrative Management
Assertion and Service Auditor's Report for a Type 2 Examination (Carved-Out
Controls of a Subservice Organization and Complementary Subservice Orga-
nization Controls and Complementary User Entity Controls)," appendix C-2,
"Illustrative Service Organization and Subservice Organization Management
Assertions and Service Auditor's Report for a Type 2 Examination (Subser-
vice Organization Presented Using the Inclusive Method and Complementary
User Entity Controls)," and appendix C-3, "Illustrative Service Auditor's Report
for a Type 2 Examination in Which the Service Auditor Disclaims an Opinion
Because of a Scope Limitation."
     2.74 If service organization management (responsible party) refuses to
provide a written assertion, paragraph .84 of AT-C section 205 states the service
auditor should withdraw from the engagement when withdrawal is possible
under applicable laws and regulations.10 Consequently, it is important to obtain
management's agreement to provide the written assertion prior to engagement
acceptance. If law or regulation does not allow the service auditor to withdraw,
the service auditor should disclaim an opinion on the description, the suitability
of design of controls, and in a type 2 examination, operating effectiveness of
controls.
     2.75 Service organization management is also required to provide the ser-
vice auditor with written representations at the conclusion of the engagement.
It may be useful for the service auditor to provide management with an example
of the types of expected representations prior to engagement acceptance. Illus-
trative management representation letters are available on the AICPA website.

Agreeing on the Terms of the Engagement
    2.76 Paragraph .07 of AT-C section 205 states that the service audi-
tor should agree on, and document in a written communication such as an

     10 A SOC 2 examination, as described in this guide, is based on service organization management

providing a written assertion to accompany the service auditor's report. Paragraph .86 of AT-C section
205, Assertion-Based Examination Engagements, permits a practitioner to report on a subject matter
when the responsible party is not the engaging party and the responsible party refuses to provide
a written assertion, as long as the report discloses management's refusal and restricts use to the
engaging party. However, this approach is unlikely to be appropriate in most SOC 2 engagements.


©2022, AICPA                                                                         AAG-SOP 2.76
54      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     engagement letter, the terms of the engagement with the engaging party. A
     written agreement, such as an engagement letter, reduces the risk that either
     the service auditor or service organization management may misinterpret the
     needs or expectations of the other party. For example, it reduces the risk that
     management may rely on the service auditor to protect the service organization
     against certain risks or to perform certain management functions. The service
     auditor would ordinarily request a signed engagement letter from the engag-
     ing party. The engaging party's refusal to provide the service auditor with an
     engagement letter may cause the service auditor to question whether a mutual
     understanding regarding the terms of the engagement has been reached and,
     in turn, may affect the service auditor's decision about whether to accept or
     continue the engagement.
          2.77 Paragraph .08 of AT-C section 205 states that the agreed-upon terms
     of the engagement should include the following:
             a. The objective and scope of the engagement
             b. The responsibilities of the service auditor
             c. A statement that the engagement will be conducted in accordance
                with attestation standards established by the AICPA
             d. The responsibilities of the responsible party and the responsibili-
                ties of the engaging party, if different
             e. A statement about the inherent limitations of an examination en-
                gagement
              f. Identification of the criteria for the measurement, evaluation, or
                 disclosure of the subject matter
             g. An acknowledgment that the engaging party agrees to provide the
                service auditor with a representation letter at the conclusion of the
                engagement
          2.78 Paragraph .42 of AT-C section 205 indicates that, if the service audi-
     tor plans to use internal auditors to provide direct assistance, prior to doing so,
     the service auditor should obtain written acknowledgment from the responsible
     party (management of the service organization) that internal auditors provid-
     ing direct assistance to the service auditor will be allowed to follow the service
     auditor's instructions and that the responsible party will not intervene in the
     work the internal auditors perform for the service auditor. When the engag-
     ing party is the responsible party, the service auditor may wish to include this
     matter in the engagement letter.
         2.79 In addition to these matters, the service auditor may decide to include
     other matters in the understanding, such as the identification of the service
     organization's service commitments and system requirements.

     Accepting a Change in the Terms of the Examination
          2.80 After the engagement agreement is executed but prior to the comple-
     tion of the engagement, management may communicate a desire to change the
     scope of the engagement (for example, a change from the inclusive method to
     the carve-out method for subservice organizations or a change in the trust ser-
     vices category or categories, services, boundaries of the service organization's
     system, or components of the system covered by the examination). A change in
     the services covered by the examination might occur, for example, because the
     service organization has discontinued providing a particular part of its service.

AAG-SOP 2.77                                                          ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                        55
When management requests a change in the scope of the engagement, para-
graph .31 of AT-C section 105 states that the service auditor should not agree
to the change in the terms of the engagement unless there is reasonable justifi-
cation for the change. Examples of situations in which there may be reasonable
justification for a change include the following:

        • Misunderstanding
          inally requested
                              concerning the nature of the examination orig-

        • Change in the informational needs of report users
        • Identification of additional system components or expansion of the
          boundaries of the system to be included in the description to en-
             hance the presentation of the description
        •    Determination that certain system components are not relevant
             to the services provided
        •    Determination that certain services are not relevant to report
             users
        •    The inability to provide the service auditor with access to a sub-
             service organization after the subservice organization initially
             agreed to provide access
        •    A change from the inclusive method to the carve-out method when
             subservice organization management refuses to provide a written
             assertion after initially agreeing to do so

    2.81 Changes to the scope of the engagement may not be considered rea-
sonable, however, if they relate to information that is incorrect, incomplete, or
otherwise unsatisfactory. For example, a request to change the period covered
by the examination or to exclude from the scope of the examination portions of
the system that are necessary to provide the services are likely to be unreason-
able, particularly if the change is requested to avoid a qualified opinion from
the service auditor. A request to change the scope of the examination to prevent
the disclosure of deviations identified at a subservice organization by changing
from the inclusive method to the carve-out method would also be unreasonable.

    2.82 If, after using professional judgment, the service auditor believes
there is reasonable justification to change the terms of the engagement from
those originally agreed on, the service auditor may continue with the engage-
ment and issue an appropriate report on the service organization's system.
Paragraph .32 of AT-C section 105 states that the report should not include
a reference to (a) the original engagement, (b) any procedures that may have
been performed, or (c) scope limitations that resulted in the changed engage-
ment. The service auditor may also decide to document the change in the en-
gagement in an addendum to the engagement letter to evidence agreement to
the change among the parties.

    2.83 However, if the service auditor and the engaging party are unable to
agree to a change of the terms of the SOC 2 examination, the service auditor
and management may agree to continue the engagement in accordance with the
original terms or mutually agree to terminate the engagement. If management
does not accept either of these alternatives, the service auditor may consider
whether to (a) disclaim an opinion on the description, suitability of design of
controls, and in a type 2 examination, operating effectiveness of controls or (b)
withdraw from the engagement.

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 2.83
56      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     Additional Considerations for a Request to Extend or Modify
     the Period Covered by the Examination
          2.84 A service auditor may encounter situations in which service orga-
     nization management requests that the period covered by an existing type 2
     report be extended or modified. For example, the service auditor has previously
     reported on the period January 1, 20X1, to June 30, 20X1, (the original pe-
     riod) and management requests that the period be extended by three months
     to cover the period January 1, 20X1, to September 30, 20X1, (the extended pe-
     riod). In this case, the service auditor would have tested the first six months
     of the extended period but would not yet have tested the last three months of
     the extended period. In other cases, the service auditor may be requested to
     modify the original period (modified period). For example, the service auditor
     might be asked to add one or more additional months to or delete one or more
     months from the original period covered by the examination. Based on the re-
     quirements in paragraph .31 of AT-C section 105, the service auditor should
     determine whether there is reasonable justification for the request. The fol-
     lowing paragraphs provide guidance to a service auditor who has decided that
     there is reasonable justification for management's request.
          2.85 When there have been no significant changes to the processes, pro-
     cedures, or controls of the service organization, the description of the service
     organization's system for the revised period may be unchanged or have only
     limited changes from the description for the original period. If the description
     of the service organization's system for the extended or modified period is the
     same as that of the original period, any procedures performed by the service
     auditor to obtain evidence about the suitability of design of controls and, in a
     type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness of controls are likely to be ap-
     propriate evidence for the service auditor's opinion addressing the extended or
     modified period; however, the service auditor should use professional judgment
     to determine the additional evidence needed.
          2.86 As an example, assume the service auditor has been asked to ex-
     tend the original period of January 1, 20X1, to June 30, 20X1, to cover through
     September 30, 20X1. The service auditor performed tests of the operating ef-
     fectiveness of controls for a sample of 13 items during the original period. In
     this case, the tests of operating effectiveness performed on the sample of 13
     items also provide evidence of the operating effectiveness of controls during
     the modified period. However, the service auditor uses professional judgment
     to determine the additional evidence of the operation of the controls for the
     period July 1 through September 30 necessary to support the service auditor's
     opinion on the operating effectiveness of controls during the modified period.
          2.87 Based on the requirements in paragraph .47 of AT-C section 205, the
     service auditor service auditor should consider the additional evidence obtained
     for the extended or modified period when forming an opinion about the descrip-
     tion, suitability of the design of controls, or in a type 2 examination, operating
     effectiveness of controls for the extended or modified period.
          2.88 Paragraph .31 of AT-C section 105 states that if a change in the terms
     of the engagement is made, the service auditor should not disregard evidence
     that was obtained prior to the change. Therefore, when forming the opinion,
     the service auditor should consider conclusions reached during the original pe-
     riod in addition to the results of tests performed and other evidence obtained
     related to the extended or modified period. In making a determination about

AAG-SOP 2.84                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                        57
the nature and extent of the additional evidence needed for the extended or
modified period, the service auditor may consider the following:

        • The overall control environment
        • The significance of the assessed risks
        • The  specific controls that were tested during the portion of the
          original report period included in the extended or modified period
             and the nature and extent of the evidence obtained for that period
        • The  nature, timing, and extent of procedures performed for the
          portion of the original period included in the extended or modified
             period
        •    The length of the extended or modified period
     2.89 When there is a change in the period covered by the examination,
the service auditor's understanding of any significant changes to the service
organization's system that occurred during the extended or modified period,
including significant changes to the services provided to user entities and sig-
nificant changes to any of the components of the system used to provide such
services, affect the service auditor's judgment on whether an engagement for an
extended or modified period is appropriate (see paragraph 2.84) and, if it is ap-
propriate, the additional evidence that is necessary. Paragraphs 3.78 and 3.134,
respectively, discuss the service auditor's responsibilities for obtaining an un-
derstanding of and performing procedures that address significant changes in
the service organization's system.
     2.90 If there have been significant changes in the service organization's
system, it may not be appropriate for the service auditor to perform an engage-
ment for an extended or modified period. For example, if a service organization
converted from one application processing system to another during the new
period and made significant modifications to the controls and those changes
did not occur during the original period, the service auditor may decide that
communicating information about changes in controls may present challenges
for the broad range of report users of the SOC 2 report. Therefore, the service
auditor may decide that an engagement covering an extended or modified pe-
riod would not be appropriate in this situation.

Management’s Written Representations for the Extended or
Modiﬁed Period
     2.91 Obtaining management's written representations is discussed be-
ginning in paragraph 3.228. Based on the requirements in paragraph .55 of
AT-C section 205, when the examination covers an extended period, and the
service auditor has requested written representations from management, the
representation letter should be dated as of the same date as the service audi-
tor's report that covers the entire extended or modified period (that is, the new
period).

Deﬁciencies That Occur During the Original, Extended, or
Modiﬁed Period
    2.92 The service auditor assesses any deficiencies identified in the origi-
nal period and corrected during the extended or modified period to determine
their overall effect on, and the need for additional disclosures in, the service
auditor's report. Similarly, based on the requirements in paragraph .47 of AT-C
section 205, deficiencies noted in the extended or modified period should also

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 2.92
58      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     be evaluated to determine their effect on the service auditor's report. Chapter
     3 discusses evaluation of deficiencies.
          2.93 Any material deficiencies identified in the portion of the original pe-
     riod that is included in the extended or modified period would be included in the
     report on the extended or modified period, even if they were corrected during
     the extended or modified period. The service auditor needs to consider the sta-
     tus of any deviations, deficiencies, or other matters noted in the portion of the
     original period that is also included in the extended or modified period, plus any
     exceptions, deficiencies, or other matters noted during the new period. For ex-
     ample, assume the original report covered the period January 1, 20X1, to June
     30, 20X1, and included a deficiency in operating effectiveness. Also assume that
     the deficiency was corrected on August 15, 20X1. For a report covering an exam-
     ination period of January 1 through September 30, the deficiency in operating
     effectiveness would be reported for the period from January 1 through August
     15, 20X1. No reference to the original report would be made in the extended or
     modified report.
         2.94 For deficiencies identified during the original period that have not
     been remediated, the service auditor would generally evaluate the reasons that
     the deficiencies have not been remediated and should consider the effect on the
     examination, based on the requirements in paragraph .47 of AT-C section 205.
          2.95 The service auditor may use evidence obtained for the original period
     that is included in the extended or modified period. Assume that the original
     period covered by the report is January 1, 20X1, to August 31, 20X1, and the
     modified period is April 1, 20X1, to December 31, 20X1. Five months of the
     modified period were tested, and four months were untested. In the original
     period, 25 items were tested, of which 12 related to the 5 months that were
     included in the modified period. There was 1 test exception noted for those 12
     items. For the period from August 31, 20X1, to December 31, 20X1, 13 items
     were tested and 1 exception was identified. The results of tests reported would
     identify the total number of exceptions identified based on the total number of
     tests performed (for example, "Two exceptions were identified in a sample of 25
     items selected for testing"). The service auditor's conclusion on the achievement
     of the applicable service commitment or system requirement would be based on
     a deviation rate of 2 of 25.


     Establishing an Overall Examination Strategy for and
     Planning the Examination
          2.96 When planning the SOC 2 examination, the engagement partner and
     other key members of the engagement team develop an overall strategy for the
     scope, timing, and conduct of the engagement and an engagement plan, consist-
     ing of a detailed approach for the nature, timing, and extent of procedures to
     be performed. Adequate planning helps the service auditor devote appropriate
     attention to important areas of the engagement, identify potential problems
     on a timely basis, and properly organize and manage the engagement to make
     sure it is performed in an effective and efficient manner. Adequate planning
     also assists the service auditor in properly assigning work to engagement team
     members and facilitates the direction, supervision, and review of their work.
     Furthermore, if the work of internal auditors, other service auditors, or ser-
     vice auditor's specialists is used in the engagement, proper planning helps the
     service auditor coordinate their work.

AAG-SOP 2.93                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                 Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                         59
    2.97 According to paragraph .11 of AT-C section 205, the service auditor
should establish an overall engagement strategy that sets the scope, timing,
and direction of the engagement and guides in the development of the engage-
ment plan. In establishing the overall engagement strategy, the service auditor
ordinarily would do the following:
        a. Obtain an understanding of the services provided by the service
           organization, the system used to provide them, and the service or-
           ganization's service commitments and system requirements that
           define the engagement.
        b. Ascertain the expected timing and nature of required communica-
           tions.
        c. Consider the factors that, in the service auditor's professional judg-
           ment, are significant in directing the engagement team's efforts.
        d. Consider the results of preliminary engagement activities, such as
           client acceptance and, when applicable, whether knowledge gained
           on other engagements for the service organization is relevant.
        e. Plan the engagement process, including possible sources of evi-
           dence and choices among alternative measurement or evaluation
           methods.
        f. Obtain an understanding of the influences and pressures on service
           organization management and other appropriate parties within the
           entity.
        g. Consider the common informational needs of the broad range of
           intended users of the SOC 2 report.
        h. Consider the risk of fraud relevant to the engagement.
        i. Ascertain the nature, timing, and extent of resources necessary to
           perform the engagement, including the use of other service audi-
           tor's or service auditor's specialists.
        j. Assess the effect on the engagement of using the work of an internal
           audit function or obtaining direct assistance from internal audit
           function personnel.
        k. Consider whether service organization management intends to dis-
           close information about how the service organization's controls
           meet the requirements of one or more process or control frame-
           works as discussed in chapter 1 and, if so, the nature of such dis-
           closures.
    2.98 The nature and extent of planning activities will vary depending on
the following factors:

        • The  service auditor's previous experience with the service organi-
          zation, including whether security events were identified in prior
             periods
        •    The circumstances of the particular examination
   2.99 Paragraph .13 of AT-C section 205 includes more detailed require-
ments related to developing the engagement plan.
    2.100 Planning is a cumulative and iterative process that occurs through-
out the engagement. Accordingly, the service auditor may need to revise the
overall strategy and engagement plan based on unexpected events, changes

©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP 2.100
60      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     in conditions, or evidence obtained that contradicts information previously
     considered.

     Planning Considerations When the Inclusive Method Is Used to
     Present the Services of a Subservice Organization
          2.101 The inclusive method is frequently difficult to implement and may
     not be feasible in certain circumstances. The approach entails extensive plan-
     ning and communication between the service auditor, the service organization,
     and the subservice organization. Use of the inclusive method becomes more
     complex when the service organization uses multiple subservice organizations.
     When the services of more than one subservice organization are likely to be
     relevant to report users, service organization management may use the inclu-
     sive method for one or more subservice organizations and the carve-out method
     for other subservice organizations. In these instances, the description needs to
     clearly state which subservice organizations and related functions are included
     in the description and which are carved out. The presentation of any subservice
     organizations should adhere to the approach that service organization man-
     agement has selected, whether that approach is the inclusive or the carve-out
     method.
          2.102 Because of the additional complexities involved with the use of the
     inclusive method, both the service organization and the subservice organiza-
     tion ought to agree on the use of the inclusive approach before it is selected
     for the examination. In addition, to facilitate the process, service organization
     management generally coordinates the use of the inclusive method with the
     subservice organization. If the inclusive method is used, matters to be agreed
     on or coordinated by the service organization and the subservice organization
     include the following:

             • The  scope of the examination and the period to be covered by the
               service auditor's report
             • Acknowledgment     from subservice organization management that
               it will provide the service auditor with a written assertion and
                  representation letter (Both service organization management and
                  subservice organization management are responsible for provid-
                  ing the service auditor with a written assertion and representa-
                  tion letter.)
             •    The planned content and format of the inclusive description
             •    The representatives of the subservice organization and the service
                  organization and who will be responsible for
                       — providing each entity's description and
                       — integrating the descriptions

             • For  a type 2 examination, the timing of the tests of operating ef-
               fectiveness of controls
         2.103 To avoid issues with the engagement, during planning, the service
     auditor would generally determine whether subservice organization manage-
     ment is willing to provide a written assertion and representation letter. In addi-
     tion, in accordance with paragraph .27 of AT-C section 105, the service auditor
     should determine whether it will be possible to obtain evidence that supports
     the portion of the opinion that addresses the subservice organization. If service
     organization management wishes to use the inclusive method, but subservice

AAG-SOP 2.101                                                        ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                        61
organization management refuses to provide a written assertion, the service
organization will not be able to use the inclusive method but may be able to use
the carve-out method instead.
     2.104 In addition to providing the service auditor with a written assertion
and representation letter at the end of the examination, subservice organiza-
tion management is also responsible for preparing a description of the subser-
vice organization's system, including the completeness, accuracy, and method
of presentation of the description. Service organization management is respon-
sible for evaluating the description of the subservice organization's system, as
well as its own.
    2.105 As a responsible party, subservice organization management is also
responsible for the following based on AT-C section 205:

        • Implementing   and operating specific controls identified by the ser-
          vice organization or, if the service organization has not identified
             specific controls, designing, implementing, and documenting con-
             trols that are suitably designed and operating effectively
        •    Having a reasonable basis for its assertion
        •    Providing the service auditor with written representations at the
             conclusion of the engagement
        •    If the service auditor plans to use internal auditors to provide
             direct assistance, providing the service auditor with written ac-
             knowledgment that internal auditors providing direct assistance
             to the service auditor will be allowed to follow the service audi-
             tor's instructions and that the subservice organization will not in-
             tervene in the work the internal auditors perform for the service
             auditor (paragraph 2.168)
        •    Providing the service auditor with the following:
                 —    Access to all information, such as records, documentation,
                      service-level agreements, and internal audit or other re-
                      ports, that subservice organization management is aware
                      of and that is relevant to the engagement (paragraph
                      .27biii(1) of AT-C section 105)
                 —    Access to additional information that the service auditor
                      may request from subservice organization management
                      for the examination (paragraph .27biii(2) of AT-C section
                      105)
                 —    Unrestricted access to personnel within the subservice
                      organization from whom the service auditor determines
                      it is necessary to obtain evidence relevant to the SOC 2
                      examination (paragraph .27biii(3) of AT-C section 105)

        • Disclosing to the service auditor the following:
                 —    Incidents of noncompliance with laws and regulations,
                      fraud, or uncorrected misstatements that are clearly not
                      trivial and that may affect one or more user entities, and
                      whether such incidents have been communicated appro-
                      priately to affected user entities
                 —    Knowledge of any actual, suspected, or alleged fraud or
                      noncompliance with laws and regulations affecting the

©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP 2.105
62       SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                                description of the service organization's system, the suit-
                                ability of design of controls,11 or in a type 2 examination,
                                the operating effectiveness of controls (Paragraph 2.107
                                discusses a situation in which service organization man-
                                agement designs the controls at the subservice organiza-
                                tion.)
                           —    All deficiencies in the design of controls of which it is
                                aware
                           —    All instances in which controls have not operated as de-
                                scribed
                           —    All identified system incidents that resulted in a signif-
                                icant impairment of the service organization's achieve-
                                ment of its service commitments and system require-
                                ments as of the date of the description (for a type 1
                                examination) or during the period of time covered by the
                                description (for a type 2 examination)
                           —    Any known events subsequent to the period covered by
                                the description of the service organization's system, up to
                                the date of the service auditor's report, that would have a
                                material effect on the subject matter or subservice orga-
                                nization management's assertion (paragraph .51 of AT-C
                                section 205)
          2.106 Unless the subservice organization is also an engaging party (which
     is not the case in most SOC 2 examinations in which the inclusive method is
     used), subservice organization management is not responsible for any of the
     items in AT-C sections 105 or 205 that relate to an engaging party (for exam-
     ple, the requirement in paragraph .07 of AT-C section 205 for the service audi-
     tor to agree on the terms of the engagement with the engaging party.) A non-
     engaging-party subservice organization has no contractual relationship with
     the service auditor.
          2.107 Subservice organization management's assertion ordinarily would
     be expected to address the same matters addressed by service organization
     management in its assertion, including (a) whether the description presents
     the services that the subservice organization provides to the service organiza-
     tion and to user entities, which are part of the service organization's system,
     in accordance with the description criteria; (b) the suitability of the design of
     the controls; and (c) in a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness of con-
     trols. However, in some cases, service organization management might design
     the controls for the subservice organization. This may happen, for example,
     when the controls of the subservice organization are necessary, in combination
     with the controls of the service organization, to provide reasonable assurance
     that one or more of the service organization's service commitments or system
     requirements were achieved. When service organization management designs
     the controls for the subservice organization, service organization management
     takes responsibility for the suitability of the design of its own controls and the


          11 Subservice organization management's written assertion addresses the same matters ad-

     dressed by service organization management's assertion. However, paragraph 2.107 discusses a situ-
     ation in which service organization management designs the controls for the subservice organization.
     In this case, subservice organization management's assertion is limited to the matters discussed in
     that paragraph.


AAG-SOP 2.106                                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                          63
subservice organization's controls; therefore, the subservice organization's as-
sertion may be limited to whether the description presents the services pro-
vided by the subservice organization to the service organization and user enti-
ties in accordance with the description criteria and whether the controls at the
subservice organization operated as described.


Performing Risk Assessment Procedures
     2.108 In accordance with paragraph .14 of AT-C section 205, the service
auditor should obtain an understanding of the description, suitability of design
of controls, and in a type 2 examination, operating effectiveness of controls and
other engagement circumstances sufficient to
        a. enable the service auditor to identify and assess the risks of ma-
           terial misstatement related to the description, suitability of design
           of controls, and in a type 2 examination, operating effectiveness of
           controls and
        b. provide a basis for designing and performing procedures to respond
           to the assessed risks and to obtain reasonable assurance to support
           the service auditor's opinion.
     2.109 In accordance with paragraph .14 of AT-C section 205, the service
auditor should obtain an understanding of the service organization's system
and related controls. Obtaining such an understanding provides the service au-
ditor with a frame of reference for exercising professional judgment throughout
the engagement. This assists the service auditor in, among other things, the
following:
         • Determining the appropriateness of the subject matter, which may
           include matters such as the system being examined, the bound-
             aries of the system, and how the system interfaces with other ser-
             vice organization systems
         •   Assessing whether the description of the service organization's
             system presents the system that has been designed and imple-
             mented in accordance with the description criteria
         •   Understanding which controls are necessary to provide reason-
             able assurance that the service organization's service commit-
             ments and system requirements are achieved based on the ap-
             plicable trust services criteria, whether the controls were suitably
             designed to achieve them, and in a type 2 report, whether controls
             were operating effectively throughout the period to achieve them
    2.110 In accordance with paragraph .15 of AT-C section 205, the service
auditor should also obtain an understanding of the service organization's inter-
nal control over the preparation of the description of the service organization's
system in accordance with the description criteria. This includes understand-
ing how service organization management identified the service organization's
principal service commitments and system requirements as well as how man-
agement evaluated the design of controls relevant to the achievement of those
service commitments and system requirements and how it determined whether
such controls were implemented.
     2.111 In addition to obtaining an understanding of the service organiza-
tion's system, including its internal controls, as described earlier, in accordance
with paragraph .16 of AT-C section 205, the service auditor should inquire of

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 2.111
64       SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     service organization management12 regarding whether it has used any spe-
     cialists in the preparation of the description, or evaluation of the suitability of
     design or operating effectiveness of controls, and whether the service organiza-
     tion has an internal audit function. If the service organization has an internal
     audit function, that function may be a key component of internal control over
     the system being examined. Paragraph .16 of AT-C section 205 also notes that
     the service auditor should make further inquiries to obtain an understanding
     of the following:
               a. The activities performed or to be performed by the internal audit
                  function as it relates to the service organization
               b. The main findings of the internal audit function as it relates to the
                  description, suitability of design of controls, and in a type 2 exami-
                  nation, operating effectiveness of controls

         2.112 The service auditor's responsibilities when a service organization
     has an internal audit department are discussed further beginning in paragraph
     2.149.

     Description of the System
          2.113 The processes service organizations use to prepare the description
     may vary widely and are usually affected by the size and complexity of the
     service organization. Service organizations may have either informal or formal
     processes to prepare the description. A small service organization that prepares
     only one description per year, for example, is likely to have an informal process
     in which a few employees with personal knowledge of the system's operation are
     assigned responsibility for drafting the description before it is reviewed by se-
     nior management. A larger, more complex service organization with a variety
     of interrelated services through multiple systems that span many functional
     units is likely to have a more formal process. Such a process is likely to include
     a project manager who coordinates preparation of the description by functional
     area and a review of the description by key executives across the organiza-
     tion. The two different processes are likely to give rise to different types of
     misstatements.
          2.114 If a service organization has an informal preparation process, the
     service auditor is unlikely to perform extensive procedures to obtain an un-
     derstanding of that process; instead, the service auditor is likely to focus on
     procedures to obtain evidence about whether the description presents the sys-
     tem that was designed and implemented in accordance with the description
     criteria.
         2.115 If a service organization has a more formal preparation process,
     understanding the service organization's preparation process and controls may
     assist the service auditor in

               • identifying possible sources of material misstatement,
               • determining the likelihood of such misstatements, and
         12 Inquiries regarding specialists and internal audit should be made of the responsible party. As

     noted in paragraph 2.43, If the service organization uses a subservice organization and the inclusive
     method is used, subservice organization is also a responsible party and inquiries should be made of
     them as well.


AAG-SOP 2.112                                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                          65
         • designing  procedures to evaluate the description, suitability of
           design of controls, and in a type 2 engagement, effectiveness of
             controls.

      2.116 In any event, the service auditor needs to remember that the ini-
tial system description prepared by service organization management is ordi-
narily revised several times during the examination, as the service auditor's
procedures provide further insight into the nature and extent of appropriate
disclosures. Therefore, the initial draft of the system description often does not
reflect what the final system description will look like. Nevertheless, when ob-
taining the understanding of the description and the process used to develop
it, it may be helpful for the service auditor to consider certain factors that may
affect the nature, timing, and extent of further procedures. When reading the
initial draft of the description, the service auditor may compare it to certain ex-
pectations developed based on the understanding of the service organization's
system. For example, if the service organization uses a subservice organiza-
tion and the subservice organization's controls are necessary, alone or in com-
bination with the entity's controls, for the service organization to achieve its
service commitments and system requirements based on the applicable trust
services criteria, the service auditor would expect the description to include
the appropriate disclosures required by description criterion DC7. Conversely,
if there have been no significant changes to the service organization's system
and controls for the specified period, the service auditor would not expect to see
disclosures required by description criterion DC9.

Design and Effectiveness of Controls
     2.117 As discussed in paragraph 2.58, service organization management
would usually be unable to make an assertion about the suitability of design
and, in a type 2 engagement, operating effectiveness of controls without first
having performed a risk assessment. The risk assessment enables management
to identify and assess the risks that threaten the achievement of the service or-
ganization's service commitments and system requirements; such assessments
are necessary for management to implement effective controls to mitigate those
risks.

     2.118 When there is extensive documentation of the service organization's
risk assessment process, inspecting such documentation may assist the service
auditor in identifying deficiencies in the design of controls. However, as dis-
cussed beginning at paragraph 2.108, the service auditor is responsible for per-
forming an engagement risk assessment as part of a SOC 2 examination. Re-
viewing management's risk assessment process, while it may be useful, is not
a substitute for the service auditor's own procedures. For that reason, a service
auditor may decide to focus only on understanding the process that manage-
ment uses to evaluate control effectiveness.

    2.119 A service organization's monitoring activities, and the reports gen-
erated from those activities, enable service organization management to peri-
odically or continuously monitor the effectiveness of controls.

   2.120 Examples of monitoring activities that service organization man-
agement may perform include the following:

         • Reviewing  results of control evaluations performed by the internal
           audit function

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 2.120
66      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

             • Periodic evaluation of control effectiveness through self-
               assessment programs
             • A combination of the various assessment techniques
          2.121 Service organization management generally documents the perfor-
     mance of monitoring activities, which permits the service auditor to inspect
     the documentation as part of obtaining an understanding of the effectiveness
     of controls within the system.

     Procedures to Obtain the Understanding
         2.122 The service auditor's procedures to obtain an understanding of the
     service organization's system may include the following, usually in some com-
     bination:
             a. Making inquiries of service organization management, those
                charged with governance, and others within the service organi-
                zation who, in the service auditor's judgment, may have relevant
                information
             b. Observing operations and inspecting documents, reports including
                those prepared for user entities, and printed and electronic records
                of transaction processing
             c. Inspecting a selection of agreements between the service organiza-
                tion and its user entities and business partners
             d. Reperforming the application of a control
             e. Reading relevant reports received from regulators
          2.123 One or more of the preceding procedures may be accomplished
     through the performance of a walk-through, which is discussed further begin-
     ning at paragraph 3.51. In addition, the service auditor may perform such pro-
     cedures concurrently with procedures to obtain evidence about whether the de-
     scription is presented in accordance with the description criteria and whether
     the controls within the system were suitably designed and operated effectively
     to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commit-
     ments and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust
     services criteria.
          2.124 When the service organization uses one or more subservice organi-
     zations, the service auditor may also consider whether a SOC 2 report is avail-
     able for those subservice organizations. When a separate SOC 2 report exists
     for a subservice organization, obtaining and reading the SOC 2 report helps
     the service auditor evaluate whether controls at the service organization are
     suitably designed. It also assists the service auditor in evaluating whether
             • the CSOCs identified by service organization management are
               identified as controls in the subservice organization's SOC 2
                  report
             •    there are any CUECs identified in the subservice organization's
                  SOC 2 report that are the responsibility of the service organiza-
                  tion or user entities and that should be included in the controls
                  identified by the service organization or CUECs to be addressed
                  by user entities.
          2.125 The service auditor may seek the assistance of a service audi-
     tor's specialist (for example, an IT specialist with experience with a system

AAG-SOP 2.121                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                        67
component such as an unusual or proprietary operating system) when obtain-
ing the understanding of the system and the related processes and controls. A
service auditor's specialist may assist the service auditor by providing techni-
cal expertise that may be useful to the service auditor's understanding of the
system.

Assessing the Risks of Material Misstatement
     2.126 Once the service auditor has obtained an understanding of the ser-
vice organization's system and the related processes and controls, the service
auditor should assess the risks of material misstatement in accordance with
paragraph .19 of AT-C section 205. Inherent and control risks reflect the likeli-
hood that the subject matter is materially misstated. The service auditor can-
not control those risks. The service auditor controls detection risk through the
nature, timing, and extent of substantive procedures and further examination
procedures. When considering the effectiveness of controls, however, the ser-
vice auditor can only obtain sufficient appropriate evidence through the per-
formance of tests of controls. Nevertheless, the service auditor's identification
and assessment of the risks of material misstatement enable the service au-
ditor to plan tests of controls that address controls that are necessary for the
achievement of the service organization's service commitments and system re-
quirements. In addition, based on the assessment, the service auditor can plan
and perform a variety of different tests of controls to obtain reasonable assur-
ance that controls were operating effectively in support of the opinion on the
effectiveness of controls in a type 2 examination. Chapter 3 provides additional
guidance on planning and performing tests of controls, including which tests
may be more effective than others and which may provide more persuasive ev-
idence about operating effectiveness of controls.

    2.127 In a SOC 2 examination, attestation risk is the risk that the service
auditor will issue an inappropriate opinion when any of the following occurs
and is not detected by the service auditor's procedures:
        a. The description of the service organization's system was not pre-
           sented in accordance with the description criteria, in all material
           respects.

        b. Because of deficiencies in the design of controls, the controls stated
           in the system description were not suitably designed throughout
           the specified period to provide reasonable assurance that the ser-
           vice organization's service commitments and system requirements
           were achieved, in all material respects, based on the applicable
           trust services criteria.

        c. In a type 2 examination, the controls stated in the system descrip-
           tion did not operate effectively throughout the specified period to
           provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's ser-
           vice commitments and system requirements were achieved, in all
           material respects, based on the applicable trust services criteria.

Deﬁning Misstatements in This Guide
    2.128 Based on the definition of misstatement in paragraph .12 of AT-C
section 105, this guide uses the following terms when discussing misstatements
related to the different subject matters in the SOC 2 examination:

©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP 2.128
68      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

              • The term description misstatement is used when describing differ-
                ences between (or omissions in) the description and the descrip-
                  tion criteria.
              •   The term deficiency is used to identify misstatements resulting
                  from controls that were not suitably designed or did not operate
                  effectively.
              •   The term deviation is used to identify the failure of a control to
                  operate in a specific instance. A deviation may, individually or in
                  combination with other deviations, result in a deficiency.

     Identifying and Assessing Inherent Risks
          2.129 The service auditor's risk assessment procedures begin with the
     identification and assessment of inherent risks that may affect the description
     of the system, suitability of design of controls, and in a type 2 examination, the
     operating effectiveness of controls. This guide uses inherent risk to refer to the
     susceptibility of the description, design of controls, and in a type 2 examination,
     operating effectiveness of controls to a material misstatement before consider-
     ation of any related controls. Inherent risks may include those arising from new
     or changed controls, system changes, significant changes in processing volume,
     new personnel or significant changes in key management or personnel, new
     types of transactions, new products or technologies, or modifications to the ser-
     vice auditor's opinion in the service auditor's report for the prior year. They
     may also include inherent risks arising from interactions with third parties.
     Table 2-1 lists additional factors that can result in inherent risks to the service
     organization.
     Table 2-1
                    Factors That Might Result in Inherent Risks

                                                                   Physical,
                                                              Environmental, and
                                  Organizational and            Technological
            System                   User Entity              Characteristics and
         Characteristics            Characteristics            Changes Therein
     • Nature and                • The size and              • Changes to business
       importance of key           structure of the            unit or supporting IT
       controls to the             service organization        and related
       achievement of the          (for example,               personnel
       service organization's      centralized versus        • Changes to the risk
       service commitments         decentralized,              assessment and
       and system                  insourced or                controls that monitor
       requirements                outsourced)                 processes resulting
     • Use of supporting         • Types of subservice         from the failure of
       information systems         organizations and           controls designed to
       such as overall             other third parties         achieve service
       architecture, cloud         that are significant to     commitments and
       computing, and other        the services provided       system requirements
       IT-hosted services          by the service
                                   organization



AAG-SOP 2.129                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                    69
     Factors That Might Result in Inherent Risks — continued

                                                          Physical,
                                                     Environmental, and
                            Organizational and         Technological
      System                   User Entity           Characteristics and
   Characteristics            Characteristics         Changes Therein
• The types and            • Whether the service     • Significant changes
  number of employee        organization's             to the service
  personnel (finance,       information systems        organization's IT
  administrative,           or subservice              architecture and
  operations, IT, sales     organizations are          applications and the
  and marketing, and        located in countries       processes and
  so on) and third          or regions deemed          systems used by
  parties (contractors,     high risk by service       subservice
  subservice                organization               organizations
  organizations,            management               • Changes to legal and
  business partners,      • The distribution of        regulatory
  and so on) with           responsibilities           requirements that
  access to the service     related to the service     affect information
  organization's system     organization's risk        systems
• Use of subservice         management
  organizations and         program between
  other third parties on    business functions
  which the service         (for example,
  organization depends      operating units, risk
  to achieve its service    management, IT
  commitments and           management, and
  system requirements       legal)
• Types of physical and • Business units with
  logical access of third   information systems
  parties to                administered under a
  information systems,      separate
  including whether         management
  access to a system        structure (for
  not addressed in the      example, outside
  SOC 2 examination         of a centralized IT
  could provide access      function)
  to the system being     • Changes to the
  examined                  service organization's
• Types of information      service model
  technology,
  applications, and
  infrastructure used,
  and their source (for
  example, whether
  software is internally
  developed or
  purchased without
  modification)
                                                                  (continued)

©2022, AICPA                                                   AAG-SOP 2.129
70      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

            Factors That Might Result in Inherent Risks — continued

                                                                   Physical,
                                                              Environmental, and
                                  Organizational and            Technological
            System                   User Entity              Characteristics and
         Characteristics            Characteristics            Changes Therein
     • Nature of
       external-facing web
       applications and the
       nature of
       applications
       developed in-house
     • Dependency on
       strategically
       significant systems
       that are no longer
       made or supported or
       that would be
       difficult to repair or
       replace in the event
       of failure
     • Dependency on IT
       equipment and
       information systems
       critical to the
       services provided,
       including those based
       on emerging
       technologies

          2.130 In accordance with paragraph .33 of AT-C section 205, the service
     auditor should also consider whether risk assessment and other procedures re-
     lated to understanding the description, suitability of design of controls, and in a
     type 2 examination, operating effectiveness of controls indicate there is a risk of
     material misstatement due to fraud or noncompliance with laws or regulations.
     For example, fraud risks related to a service organization might include man-
     agement override of controls at the service organization, misuse of user entity
     or business partner information assets by service organization personnel, and
     creation, by service organization personnel, of false or misleading documents
     or records of transactions processed by the service organization.

          2.131 Inherent risks may also include risks derived from user entities
     and subservice organizations that threaten the achievement of the service or-
     ganization's service commitments and system requirements if not addressed by
     effective CUECs and CSOCs. CUECs are discussed further beginning at para-
     graph 2.23, and CSOCs are discussed beginning at paragraph 2.20.

     Identifying and Assessing Control Risk
         2.132 As used in this guide, control risk is the risk that a material mis-
     statement will not be prevented, or detected and corrected, on a timely basis by

AAG-SOP 2.130                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                         71
the service organization's controls. Considering the controls the service organi-
zation has designed and implemented to mitigate inherent risks at a high level
enables the service auditor to focus further procedures on those controls that
are necessary for the service organization to achieve its service commitments
and system requirements.

Procedures to Assess the Risks of Material Misstatement
    2.133 When assessing the risks of material misstatement, the service au-
ditor may perform one or more of the following procedures:

        • Reviewing  service organization management's risk assessment. As
          discussed beginning at paragraph 2.58, service organization man-
             agement must have a reasonable basis for its assertions about the
             description, suitability of design of controls, and in a type 2 exam-
             ination, operating effectiveness of controls. An important element
             of the system and related controls involves the process that ser-
             vice organization management uses to identify and assess risks
             to the achievement of the service organization's service commit-
             ments and system requirements; as such, that process is part of
             the reasonable basis service organization management relies on
             to make its assertions.

                 —    Reviewing service organization management's risk as-
                      sessment enables the service auditor to understand and
                      compare the risks considered by management with those
                      identified by the service auditor. In addition, the ser-
                      vice auditor's independent review of service organization
                      management's risk assessment, in combination with the
                      service auditor's knowledge, assists with the identifica-
                      tion of risks not previously considered.

        • Reviewing   reports by internal audit, compliance teams, and qual-
          ity teams. Such reports may identify unique service organization
             risks and control deficiencies.
        •    Reviewing reports by regulators. Such reports may describe risks
             or deficiencies identified by regulators.
        •    Reviewing user entity complaints or litigation, which may indicate
             the service organization's failure to achieve one or more service
             commitments and system requirements.
        •    Making inquiries of service organization management about fraud
             or noncompliance with laws or regulations as discussed in para-
             graph 3.195.
        •    Making inquiries of service organization management about evi-
             dence that contradicts assertions about the suitability of design of
             controls or, in a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness
             of controls. A major change to system procedures may have been
             made to address a material failure of controls to achieve a ser-
             vice commitment or system requirement. When a major change
             has been made, inquiry of management about why the change
             was made may not only reveal a prior control deficiency but may
             also assist the service auditor in understanding the nature of risks
             affecting the system.

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 2.133
72      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          2.134 Chapter 3 provides additional guidance on designing and perform-
     ing further procedures that are responsive to the service auditor's assessed risk.


     Considering Materiality During Planning
         2.135 In accordance with paragraph .17 of AT-C section 205, the service
     auditor should consider materiality when establishing the overall engagement
     strategy. Because of the vast number of controls within a system, even at a
     small service organization, the service auditor needs to consider materiality
     during planning to determine the nature, timing, and extent of procedures nec-
     essary to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence to support the opinions in the
     SOC 2 examination. Adoption of an appropriate materiality also allows the ser-
     vice auditor to prioritize testing efforts and supports an effective and efficient
     engagement.
         2.136 Paragraph .A19 of AT-C section 205 states that materiality in an
     attestation engagement is considered in the context of qualitative factors and,
     when applicable, quantitative factors. The relative importance of each of those
     factors when considering materiality in a particular engagement is a matter
     of professional judgment and is affected by the service auditor's perception of
     the common information needs of intended users, as identified beginning at
     paragraph 1.07. In this context, it is reasonable for the service auditor to as-
     sume that intended users possess a certain level of knowledge, as described in
     paragraph 1.08.
          2.137 When considering materiality, the service auditor typically consid-
     ers whether there is substantial likelihood that description misstatements or
     deficiencies in control design (and control effectiveness in a type 2 engage-
     ment) would influence judgments made by intended users based on the subject
     matter.
          2.138 If the service auditor becomes aware, during the conduct of the ex-
     amination, of information that would have caused the service auditor to have
     initially determined a different materiality, paragraph .18 of AT-C section 205
     states that the service auditor should reconsider materiality. Chapter 3 of this
     guide discusses materiality considerations during the performance of the ex-
     amination in further detail.

     Description of the System
          2.139 Because the description of the system is a narrative presentation,
     considering materiality during planning involves some unique considerations.
     Certain aspects of the description of the system may be quantitatively mea-
     sured but others may not be. When considering aspects of the description that
     cannot be quantitatively measured, it may be necessary for the service audi-
     tor to consider other ways to identify and measure description misstatements.
     This necessitates consideration of the nature of potential misstatements during
     planning.
         2.140 For instance, the service auditor may consider any of the following
     to be a description misstatement:

             • Inclusion  of misleading or inappropriate information (for exam-
               ple, information that obscures the information required by the de-
                  scription criteria such as excessive or irrelevant disclosures)

AAG-SOP 2.134                                                        ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                          73
         • Omission   of information required by the description criteria (for
           example, inadequate or incomplete information)
         • Changes   to disclosures made in a previous period without reason-
           able justification
         • Misstatements of fact
In accordance with paragraph .17 of AT-C section 205, once a misstatement
is identified, the service auditor should evaluate whether the description mis-
statement is material to the description, as discussed further in chapter 3.
    2.141 An initial draft of a narrative presentation that contains misstate-
ments (such as omissions of certain disclosures that the service auditor ex-
pected or insufficient or inappropriate disclosures about matters required by
the criteria) may prompt the service auditor to discuss the misstatements with
service organization management. This discussion ordinarily would be held as
early as possible to enable service organization management to revise the de-
scription. In addition, the misstatements in the draft may cause the service au-
ditor to conclude that it will be necessary to obtain more persuasive evidence
about one or more of the significant disclosures identified during planning to
determine whether the final description will be prepared in accordance with
the description criteria.

Effectiveness of Controls
   2.142 When considering materiality during planning, a service auditor
may consider following a process such as this:
        a. Identifying the risks that threaten the achievement of the service
           organization's service commitments and system requirements
        b. Assessing the likelihood and magnitude of those risks
        c. Understanding the processes and controls the service organization
           has designed, implemented, and operated to mitigate those risks to
           an acceptable level based on the applicable trust services criteria
        d. Designing tests of controls that focus on controls necessary to miti-
           gate the risks that threaten the achievement of the service organi-
           zation's service commitments and system requirements
        e. Developing a materiality threshold for evaluating control devia-
           tions (Although there is no requirement in the attestation stan-
           dards to develop a threshold below which deviations would be
           considered immaterial, doing so may assist a service auditor in the
           development of appropriate procedures and in the evaluation of the
           results of the procedures.)
     2.143 For example, because a service organization updates software fre-
quently, the service auditor may believe that (a) controls are unlikely to operate
effectively if application software changes are not tested prior to implementa-
tion in the production environment and (b) the likelihood of the realization of
that risk is high. Therefore, the service auditor may determine that the extent
of evidence needed to support a conclusion that controls over software applica-
tion changes are effective is greater than that needed to support a conclusion
about the effectiveness of controls that are less significant to the achievement of
the service organization's service commitments and system requirements (and
the service auditor's opinion). In that case, when designing tests of controls
over software application change controls, the service auditor would be likely
to establish a low acceptable rate of error for such testing.

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 2.143
74      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     Considering Entity-Level Controls
          2.144 The service organization designs, implements, and operates controls
     at the entity level that are necessary to support the achievement of its service
     commitments and system requirements. That is particularly true for controls
     that address the trust services criteria for the control environment component
     of internal control (CC1.1–1.5). Although entity-level controls can also address
     the achievement of service commitments and system requirements based on
     the trust services criteria for the information and communication (CC2.1–2.3),
     risk assessment (CC3.1–3.4), and monitoring (CC4.1–4.2) components of inter-
     nal control, management often addresses those criteria by designing and im-
     plementing controls that operate at the system level. As an example, assume
     that the service organization performs an enterprise-wide risk assessment and
     also assesses its information security risk and its infrastructure risk at the
     system level. Because the latter two assessments are likely to be more relevant
     in the SOC 2 examination, the service auditor ordinarily devotes more time
     and attention to obtaining an understanding of those assessments than to the
     enterprise-wide risk assessment.
         2.145 Nevertheless, effective entity-level controls, particularly those de-
     signed and implemented to meet the control environment criteria, may enable
     the service auditor to place greater confidence in the processes and controls
     the service organization has designed, implemented, and operated to provide
     reasonable assurance that its service commitments and system requirements
     were achieved. Thus, effective entity-level controls may reduce the nature and
     extent of the procedures the service auditor believes are necessary to perform to
     obtain sufficient appropriate evidence about the operating effectiveness of the
     controls stated in the description to support the opinion. They may also affect
     decisions related to when such procedures are planned to be performed.
          2.146 In contrast, deficiencies in entity-level controls often have a per-
     vasive effect on other controls. If the service auditor determines that certain
     entity-level controls did not operate effectively, the service auditor may be able
     to adjust the nature, timing, and extent of procedures performed to obtain ev-
     idence about whether the controls stated in the description were effective. In
     some situations, however, deficiencies in the operation of entity-level controls
     may lead the service auditor to conclude that controls did not operate effec-
     tively. For example, consider a service organization that has been unable to
     retain knowledgeable employees. In that situation, the service auditor may de-
     cide to increase the extent of testing of controls that prevent and detect system
     incidents (for example, inspection of security configurations and event man-
     agement scan logs) to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence about whether the
     controls stated in the description operated effectively.
         2.147 The service auditor may find it necessary to understand the root
     cause of any identified deficiencies in entity-level controls to assess the impact
     they may have on the operating effectiveness of the related controls stated in
     the description. Ways in which a service auditor may respond to ineffective
     entity-level controls in a SOC 2 examination include the following:

             • Selecting different types of procedures, or changing the timing of
               those procedures, to obtain evidence about the operating effective-
                  ness of controls
             •    Obtaining more extensive evidence about the operating effective-
                  ness of controls

AAG-SOP 2.144                                                        ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                           75
    2.148 Because of the important effect entity-level controls may have on
the operating effectiveness of controls stated in the description, the descrip-
tion of the system often includes disclosures about the entity-level controls de-
signed, implemented, and operated to address the risks that would threaten the
service organization's achievement of its service commitments and system re-
quirements. A sample description, illustrating such disclosures, is available on
the AICPA website. It also illustrates, in section 4 of the description, the tests
the service auditor may perform to determine whether the entity-level controls
applicable to the trust services criteria relevant to the control environment op-
erated effectively throughout the period.


Understanding the Internal Audit Function
     2.149 An internal audit function performs assurance and consulting activ-
ities designed to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of the service organiza-
tion's governance, risk management, and internal control processes. Activities
similar to those performed by an internal audit function may be conducted by
functions with other titles within a service organization. Some or all of the ac-
tivities of an internal audit function may also be outsourced to a third-party ser-
vice provider. For example, a service organization may engage a service provider
to perform (a) penetration testing, (b) responsibilities of the internal audit func-
tion that the function itself does not have the competency or qualifications to
perform (for example, performing the IT internal audit function), or (c) a one-
time special assessment at the request of the board of directors. Neither the
title of the function nor whether it is performed by the service organization
or a third-party service provider is a sole determinant of whether the service
auditor can use the work of internal auditors. Rather, it is the nature of the ac-
tivities, the extent to which the internal audit function's organizational status
and relevant policies and procedures support the objectivity of the internal au-
ditors, the competence of internal auditors, and the systematic and disciplined
approach of the function that are relevant. References in this guide to the work
of the internal audit function include relevant activities of other functions or
third-party providers that have these characteristics.
    2.150 If the service organization has an internal audit function, that func-
tion may be important to the service organization's internal control over the
system being examined. Activities of the internal audit function that may be
relevant to the SOC 2 examination include those that provide information or
evidence about whether the description is presented in accordance with the de-
scription criteria or whether controls were suitably designed and, in a type 2
examination, operating effectively.
    2.151 If the internal audit function does not perform activities related to
the SOC 2 examination, or if the service organization does not have a func-
tion that performs similar activities, the service auditor would ordinarily de-
termine whether other monitoring activities provide sufficient appropriate ev-
idence about the effective operation of controls.
     2.152 Based on the requirements in paragraph .27 of AT-C section 205,
when obtaining an understanding of the internal audit function's responsibili-
ties and activities, the service auditor should make inquiries of internal audit
personnel and read information about the internal audit function stated in the
description. Ordinarily, the service auditor also requests and reads any rele-
vant internal audit reports related to the period covered by the examination.

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 2.152
76       SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     For example, reading the internal audit plan and reports issued by the internal
     audit function enables the service auditor to understand the nature of the in-
     ternal audit function's responsibilities and how the internal audit function fits
     into the service organization's structure. Additionally, any findings in internal
     audit reports that relate to the presentation of the description or the suitability
     of design of controls or, in a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness of
     controls may affect the risk assessment and the determination of the nature,
     timing, and extent of the service auditor's planned procedures.


     Planning to Use the Work of Internal Auditors
         2.153 If, after obtaining an understanding of the internal audit function,
     the service auditor concludes that (a) the activities of the internal audit func-
     tion are not relevant to the SOC 2 examination or (b) it may not be efficient to
     consider the work of the internal audit function, the service auditor does not
     need to consider the work of the internal audit function.
         2.154 The service auditor may determine, however, that the examination
     can be performed more effectively or efficiently by using the work of the inter-
     nal audit function or obtaining direct assistance from internal audit function
     personnel. The phrase "using the work of the internal audit function" usually
     refers to using work designed and performed by the internal audit function,
     in accordance with an internal audit plan, to obtain evidence to support the
     achievement of the service organization's service commitments and system re-
     quirements. This differs from work the internal audit function performs to pro-
     vide direct assistance to the service auditor, including assistance in performing
     tests of controls that are designed by the service auditor and performed by
     members of the internal audit function under the service auditor's direction,
     supervision, and review. When members of the internal audit function provide
     direct assistance, the procedures they perform are similar to work performed
     by the engagement team.13

     Evaluating the Competence, Objectivity, and Systematic
     Approach Used by Internal Auditors
          2.155 In accordance with paragraph .40 of AT-C section 205, if the service
     auditor determines that the work of the internal audit function is relevant to
     the SOC 2 examination, and the service auditor intends to use the work of the
     internal audit function in obtaining evidence, or plans to use internal auditors
     to provide direct assistance during the examination, the service auditor should
     determine whether the work can be used for purposes of the examination by
     evaluating several factors. The factors the service auditor should evaluate in-
     clude the following:
               a. The level of competence of the internal audit function or the indi-
                  vidual internal auditors providing direct assistance
               b. The extent to which the internal audit function's organizational sta-
                  tus and relevant policies and procedures support the objectivity of
                  the internal audit function as a whole or, for internal auditors pro-
                  viding direct assistance, the existence of threats to the objectivity


          13 Regardless of whether the service auditor plans to use internal audit's work or to use the

     internal audit function in a direct assistance capacity, the term engagement team, as used throughout
     this guide, does not include individuals within the service organization's internal audit function.


AAG-SOP 2.153                                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                      Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                                         77
               of those internal auditors and the related safeguards applied to re-
               duce or eliminate those threats
          c. The application by the internal audit function of a systematic and
             disciplined approach, including quality control
     2.156 When evaluating competence, the service auditor would generally
consider the attainment and maintenance of knowledge and skills of the inter-
nal audit function at the level required to enable assigned tasks to be performed
diligently and with the appropriate level of quality, particularly as it relates to
the work of the internal audit function that is to be used or, when using individ-
uals for direct assistance, the individual. Consideration of factors such as the
following may assist the service auditor with that evaluation:
          a. Hiring policies
          b. The adequacy of resources relative to the size of the entity
          c. Technical training and proficiency of individuals
          d. Knowledge of the areas being examined, including industry-specific
             or technical knowledge required to perform the work
          e. Whether internal auditors are members of relevant professional
             bodies or have certifications that oblige them to comply with the
             relevant professional standards, including continuing professional
             education requirements
     2.157 When evaluating objectivity, the service auditor would generally
consider whether the internal audit function as a whole or, when using indi-
viduals for direct assistance, the individual performs tasks without allowing
bias, conflict of interest, or undue influence of others to override professional
judgments. Factors that may affect the service auditor's evaluation of objectiv-
ity include the following:
          a. Whether the organizational status of the internal audit function,
             including the function's authority and accountability, supports the
             ability of the function to be free from bias, conflict of interest, or
             undue influence of others (for example, whether the internal au-
             dit function reports to those charged with governance or to an
             officer with appropriate authority, or if the function reports to
             management, whether it has direct access to those charged with
             governance)14
          b. Whether the internal audit function is free of any conflicting re-
             sponsibilities (for example, having managerial or operational duties
             or responsibilities that are outside of the internal audit function)
          c. Whether those charged with governance oversee employment deci-
             sions related to the internal audit function (for example, whether
             they determine the appropriate remuneration in accordance with
             policy)


      14 As indicated in paragraph .A18 of AT-C section 105, Concepts Common to All Attestation En-

gagements, management and governance structures vary by organization, reflecting influences such
as size and ownership characteristics. Because of the diversity that exists among organizations, the
attestation standards do not specify the persons or groups at each organization with specified respon-
sibilities. Identifying the appropriate service organization management personnel or those charged
with governance to whom the internal audit function should report may require the exercise of pro-
fessional judgment.


©2022, AICPA                                                                       AAG-SOP 2.157
78      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          2.158 When evaluating the application by the internal audit function of
     a systematic and disciplined approach, including quality control, the service
     auditor may consider the function's approach to planning, performing, super-
     vising, reviewing, and documenting its activities. Relevant factors to consider
     may include, among others, (a) the existence, adequacy, and use of documented
     internal audit procedures or guidance covering such areas as risk assessments,
     work programs, documentation, and reporting or (b) whether the internal audit
     function has appropriate quality control policies and procedures.
          2.159 The objectivity and competence of internal auditors are important
     considerations when determining whether to use their work and, if so, the na-
     ture and extent to which their work may be used. However, as noted in para-
     graph .A50 of AT-C section 205, a high degree of objectivity cannot compensate
     for a low degree of competence, nor can a high degree of competence compen-
     sate for a low degree of objectivity. Additionally, when the service auditor is
     considering whether to use the work of the internal audit function, neither a
     high level of competence nor strong support for the objectivity of the internal
     auditors compensates for the lack of a systematic and disciplined approach by
     the internal audit function.
          2.160 Based on an evaluation of the preceding factors, it is up to the ser-
     vice auditor to determine whether the risks to the quality of the work of the
     internal audit function or the individual, when using direct assistance, are too
     significant and whether it is appropriate to use any of the work of the function
     or individual as examination evidence.

     Determining the Extent to Which to Use the Work of
     Internal Auditors
          2.161 The extent to which the service auditor plans to use the work of
     the internal audit function is a matter of professional judgment. In accordance
     with paragraph .40 of AT-C section 205, because the service auditor has sole
     responsibility for expressing an opinion on the description, the suitability of
     design of controls, and in a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness of
     controls, the service auditor should make all significant judgments in the ex-
     amination, including when to use the work of the internal audit function in
     obtaining evidence.
          2.162 To prevent undue use of the internal audit function in obtaining
     evidence, paragraph .40 of AT-C section 205 also notes that the service auditor
     should use less of the work of the internal audit function and perform more of
     the work directly when more judgment is involved in planning and perform-
     ing relevant procedures or in evaluating the evidence obtained. As indicated in
     paragraph .44 of AT-C section 205, the service auditor should plan to use less
     of the work of the function and perform more of the work directly,
             a. the more judgment is involved in
                       i.   planning and performing relevant procedures or
                      ii.   evaluating the evidence obtained.
             b. the higher the assessed risk of material misstatement.
             c. the less the internal audit function's organizational status and rel-
                evant policies and procedures adequately support the objectivity of
                the internal auditors.
             d. the lower the level of competence of the internal audit function.

AAG-SOP 2.158                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                          79
     2.163 Relevant factors in determining whether to use the work of the in-
ternal audit function to obtain evidence about the operating effectiveness of
controls include the pervasiveness of the control, the potential for management
override of the control, and the degree of judgment and subjectivity required to
evaluate the effectiveness of the control. As the significance of these factors in-
creases, so does the need for the service auditor, rather than the internal audit
function, to perform the procedures, and conversely, as these factors decrease
in significance, the need for the service auditor to perform the tests decreases.

Coordinating Procedures With the Internal Auditors
     2.164 When the service auditor plans to use the work of the internal au-
dit function, the service auditor may find it helpful to review the internal au-
dit function's audit plan and discuss the planned use of the work of the in-
ternal audit function with service organization management. The audit plan
provides information about the nature, timing, extent, and scope of the work
performed by the internal audit function, as well as the work that is planned
to be performed.

    2.165 As part of this discussion and as a basis for coordinating the re-
spective activities between the service auditor and the internal auditors when
planning to use the work of the internal audit function, it may be useful to
address the following:

         • The nature of the work performed
         • The timing of such work
         • The extent of coverage
         • Proposed methods of item selection and sample sizes
         • Documentation of the work performed
         • Review and reporting procedures
     2.166 Coordination between the service auditor and the internal au-
dit function is effective when discussions take place at appropriate intervals
throughout the period to which management's assertion pertains. It is impor-
tant that the service auditor inform the internal audit function of significant
matters as they arise during the engagement. Equally important is that the
service auditor has access to relevant reports of the internal audit function and
is advised of any significant matters that come to the attention of the internal
auditors, when such matters may affect the scope of the examination and the
potential nature, timing, or extent of the examination procedures. Communi-
cation throughout the engagement provides opportunities for internal auditors
to bring up matters that may affect the service auditor's work. The service au-
ditor is then able to take such information into account (for example, when
assessing the risks that the description does not present the system that was
designed and implemented in accordance with the description criteria or that
controls were not suitably designed or, in a type 2 examination, not operating
effectively).

     2.167 Although the service auditor is not precluded from using work that
the internal audit function has already performed, coordination of activities
between the service auditor and the internal audit function is likely to be most
effective when appropriate interaction occurs before the internal audit function
performs the work.

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 2.167
80      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

         2.168 In accordance with paragraph .42 of AT-C section 205, when plan-
     ning to use internal auditors to provide direct assistance, the service auditor
     should obtain written acknowledgment from service organization management,
     as the responsible party, that internal auditors providing direct assistance will
     be allowed to follow the service auditor's instructions without management's
     interference.

     Evaluating Whether the Work of Internal Auditors Is Adequate
     for the Service Auditor’s Purposes
          2.169 When using the work of the internal audit function, paragraph .41
     of AT-C section 205 indicates that the service auditor should perform sufficient
     procedures, including reperformance, on the body of work of the internal audit
     function that the service auditor plans to use to evaluate whether such work
     is adequate for the service auditor's purposes. Chapter 3 provides guidance on
     the service auditor's considerations when performing procedures on that work.


     Planning to Use the Work of an Other Practitioner
         2.170 In certain situations, the service auditor might plan to use the work
     of an other practitioner. For example, if the service organization operates divi-
     sions or business units in other geographic locations, the service auditor might
     plan to use the work of a practitioner located in the other geographic region to
     obtain sufficient appropriate evidence to enable the service auditor to express
     an opinion on the description, suitability of design of controls and, in a type 2
     examination, operating effectiveness of controls.
          2.171 Paragraph .33 of AT-C section 105 indicates that when the service
     auditor expects to use the work of an other practitioner, the service auditor has
     the following reporting options:
             a. Assume responsibility for the work of the other practitioner
             b. Make reference to the other practitioner in the service auditor's
                report
         2.172 If the service auditor expects to use the work of the other practi-
     tioner, paragraph .33 of AT-C section 105 states that the service auditor should
     do the following:
             a. Obtain an understanding of whether the other practitioner under-
                stands, and will comply with, the ethical requirements that are rel-
                evant to the engagement and, in particular, is independent. (The
                discussion beginning in paragraph 2.41 also applies to the other
                practitioner.)
             b. Obtain an understanding of the other practitioner's professional
                competence. (The service auditor may make inquiries about the
                other practitioner to the other practitioner's professional organi-
                zation or to other practitioners, inquire about whether the other
                practitioner is subject to regulatory oversight, and read any pub-
                licly available regulatory reports, including reviews or inspections
                of the other practitioner's working papers.)
             c. Communicate clearly with the other practitioner about the scope
                and timing of the other practitioner's work and findings. (Such com-
                munication enables the service auditor to plan the nature, timing,
                and extent of any procedures that relate to the work of the other

AAG-SOP 2.168                                                        ©2022, AICPA
                 Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                         81
           practitioner, including the involvement of the service auditor in the
           work of the other practitioner. Due to complexities involved in the
           planning of the engagement and obtaining agreement between all
           parties, using the work of an other practitioner is most likely to be
           successful when these matters are addressed early in engagement
           planning.)
        d. Be involved in the work of the other practitioner, if assuming re-
           sponsibility for the work of the other practitioner.
        e. Evaluate whether the other practitioner's work is adequate for the
           service auditor's purposes. (To make this evaluation, the service au-
           ditor should obtain an understanding of the results of the other
           practitioner's work and findings associated with that work. The
           service auditor may obtain such an understanding through review
           of the report of the results of the other practitioner's procedures,
           discussions with the other practitioner, and inspection of the other
           practitioner's working papers.)
        f. Determine whether to make reference to the other practitioner in
           the service auditor's report. (As stated in paragraph 2.173c, the ser-
           vice auditor ordinarily would not choose to refer to the other practi-
           tioner in the report because doing so is substantially equivalent to
           presenting a subservice organization using the carve-out method.)
     2.173 In applying paragraph .33 of AT-C section 105 in a SOC 2 examina-
tion, consider a situation in which service organization management engages a
service auditor to perform a type 2 examination that includes the service orga-
nization and a subservice organization. The service auditor determines that the
subservice organization has already engaged an other practitioner (a subser-
vice auditor) to perform a type 2 examination, which covers the same period as
the period to be covered by the SOC 2 examination of the service organization
and addresses the services provided to the service organization and relevant
controls. The following are some options for the SOC 2 examination:
        a. Service organization management may elect to carve out the sub-
           service organization's services and controls, in which case certain
           report users will need to obtain a type 2 report from the subservice
           organization.
        b. Service organization management may elect to present the sub-
           service organization's services and controls using the inclusive
           method. In this case, a number of alternatives may be available
           for management and the service auditor, including the following:
                 i. The service auditor performs all the work and does not use
                    the work of the subservice auditor, other than to consider
                    whether the subservice auditor's type 2 report provides
                    evidence that relevant controls at the subservice organi-
                    zation are not suitably designed or operating effectively.
                    (However, the subservice auditor's type 2 report, if cover-
                    ing the same period as the service auditor's inclusive type
                    2 report, is unlikely to be available in time for use by the
                    service auditor.)
                ii. The service auditor uses the work of the subservice au-
                    ditor and assumes responsibility for that work. In this
                    scenario, the service auditor should comply with the re-
                    quirements in paragraph .33 of AT-C section 105. The

©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP 2.173
82      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                          description would include those aspects of the subservice
                          organization's system that are relevant to the achievement
                          of the service organization's service commitments and sys-
                          tem requirements based on the applicable trust services
                          criteria, and the description of tests of controls and results
                          would include the tests performed by the subservice au-
                          ditor and the results, without attributing the tests to the
                          subservice auditor.
             c. Although AT-C section 205 permits the service auditor to make ref-
                erence to the subservice auditor, this option is rarely used for a
                number of reasons:
                      i. First, even if planning to make reference to the subser-
                         vice auditor, a service auditor who plans to use the work
                         of a subservice auditor should comply with all the re-
                         quirements in paragraph .33 of AT-C section 105, includ-
                         ing communicating clearly about the scope and timing of
                         the subservice auditor's work and findings and evaluating
                         whether the subservice auditor's work is adequate for the
                         service auditor's purposes.
                      ii. Second, this option is substantially equivalent to pre-
                          senting the subservice organization using the carve-out
                          method in that report users would need to obtain the
                          subservice auditor's report on the subservice organization
                          that includes a description of the system, the tests per-
                          formed, and results of tests.
                     iii. Third, report users are unlikely to understand the respon-
                          sibilities of the service auditor and the subservice auditor
                          in a SOC 2 report prepared under this approach.
         2.174 When using the work of an other practitioner, paragraph .A59 of
     AT-C section 105 clarifies that the service auditor is responsible for directing,
     supervising, and performing the engagement in compliance with professional
     standards, applicable regulatory and legal requirements, and the firm's policies
     and procedures. The service auditor is also responsible for determining whether
     the report issued is appropriate in the circumstances.
         2.175 Chapter 4 discusses reporting when the work of an other practi-
     tioner is used.


     Planning to Use the Work of a Service Auditor’s Specialist
          2.176 When planning a SOC 2 examination, a service auditor may decide
     that engaging or assigning a specialist with specific skills and knowledge is
     necessary to execute the planned examination. If a service auditor's specialist
     will be used in the SOC 2 examination, paragraph .37 of AT-C section 205 states
     that the service auditor should do the following:
             a. Evaluate whether the specialist has the necessary competence, ca-
                pabilities, and objectivity for the service auditor's purposes. In the
                case of a specialist, the evaluation of objectivity should include
                inquiry regarding interests and relationships that may create a
                threat to the objectivity of the specialist.


AAG-SOP 2.174                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                   Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                           83
        b. Obtain an understanding of the specialist's field of expertise to en-
           able the service auditor to determine the nature, scope, and objec-
           tives of the specialist's work and to evaluate the adequacy of that
           work.
         c. Agree with the specialist regarding
                  i. the nature, scope, and objectives of the specialist's work;
                  ii. the respective roles and responsibilities of the service au-
                      ditor and the specialist;
                 iii. the nature, timing, and extent of communication between
                      the service auditor and the specialist, including the form
                      of any report or documentation to be provided by the spe-
                      cialist; and
                 iv. the need for the service auditor's specialist to observe con-
                     fidentiality requirements.
     2.177 By communicating with the service auditor's specialist about these
matters early in the engagement, the service auditor will be in a better posi-
tion to plan the scope and timing of the specialist's work on the engagement. In
addition, the service auditor will be better able to plan the nature, timing, and
extent of any procedures that relate to the work of the specialist, including the
direction, supervision, and review of the specialist's work, particularly if that
work will be used during initial engagement planning and risk assessment.
Though not required, the service auditor would generally consider document-
ing, in an engagement letter or other appropriate form of written communica-
tion, the understanding reached with the service auditor's specialist about the
matters discussed. When evaluating the service auditor specialist's competence
and capabilities, the service auditor may obtain information from a variety of
sources, including discussions with the specialist, personal experience with the
specialist's work, discussions with others who are familiar with the special-
ist's work, or published papers or books written by the specialist, among other
things. In addition, the service auditor needs to determine that the special-
ist has a sufficient understanding of the attestation standards relevant to the
SOC 2 examination and this guide to enable the specialist to understand how
the specialist's work will help achieve the objectives of the engagement.
     2.178 When evaluating the objectivity of the service auditor's external
specialist, the service auditor may inquire of service organization management
(or the engaging party, if different) about any known interests or relationships
(such as financial interests, business and personal relationships, and provision
of other services by the service auditor's external specialist) that management
has with the specialist that may affect the objectivity of the specialist. In certain
cases, the service auditor may decide to request written representations from
the service auditor's external specialist about any interests or relationships
with service organization management (or the engaging party, if different) of
which the specialist is aware.
     2.179 The service auditor may also discuss with the service auditor's spe-
cialist any safeguards applicable to the specialist and evaluate whether the
safeguards are adequate to reduce known threats to independence to an ac-
ceptable level. There may be some circumstances in which safeguards cannot
reduce such threats to an acceptable level. For example, if the service auditor's
specialist has played a significant role in implementing or operating significant
aspects of the service organization's system and controls necessary to achieve

©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP 2.179
84      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     its service commitments and system requirements, the specialist is likely not
     objective (independent) when measuring or evaluating the suitability of design
     of controls or, in a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness of controls
     within that program.
         2.180 Paragraph .A43 of AT-C section 205 states the following may be
     relevant to obtaining an understanding of the specialist's field of expertise:
             a. Whether the specialist's field includes areas of specialty relevant to
                the engagement
             b. Whether professional or other standards and regulatory or legal
                requirements apply
             c. Assumptions and methods used by the specialist and whether they
                are generally accepted within the specialist's field and appropriate
                in the engagement circumstances
             d. The nature of internal and external data or information used by the
                service auditor's specialist
         2.181 The nature, timing, and extent of the service auditor's procedures to
     evaluate the matters discussed in this section vary depending on the circum-
     stances of the engagement. When determining the nature, timing, and extent of
     those procedures, paragraph .39 of AT-C section 205 indicates that the service
     auditor should consider the following:
             a. The significance of the service auditor's specialist's work in the con-
                text of the engagement
             b. The nature of the matter to which the service auditor's specialist's
                work relates
             c. The risks of material misstatement in the matter to which the ser-
                vice auditor's specialist's work relates
             d. The service auditor's knowledge of and experience with previous
                work performed by the service auditor's specialist
             e. Whether the service auditor's specialist is subject to the service au-
                ditor's firm's quality control policies and procedures
         2.182 In addition to the matters discussed in this section, paragraph .37d
     of AT-C section 205 also indicates that the service auditor should evaluate the
     adequacy of the work of the service auditor's specialist for the service auditor's
     purposes. That evaluation is discussed further beginning in paragraph 3.210.


     Meeting the Requirements of a Process or
     Control Framework
          2.183 When management has included disclosures about a process or con-
     trol framework in the description, the service auditor may need to broaden the
     understanding of the system to include an understanding of (1) the require-
     ments of the process or control framework and (2) how the controls imple-
     mented by management met those requirements. Such an understanding as-
     sists the service auditor in evaluating (1) whether controls were implemented
     to achieve the related service commitments and related system requirements
     and (2) whether the description is presented in accordance with the description
     criteria.

AAG-SOP 2.180                                                        ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                         85
SOC 2 Examination That Addresses Additional
Criteria (SOC 2+)
     2.184 In a SOC 2+ examination, management would be expected to modify
its assertion to also address the evaluation of controls against the requirements
of the process or control framework.
    2.185 It is likely that the process or control framework is important to
a broad range of users and management would identify meeting the require-
ments of the framework as a principal service commitment or service require-
ment. Management is also likely to disclose information about how the system
components, including processes and controls (DC3), addressed requirements of
the process or control framework and how the implemented controls met these
requirements (DC5). The service auditor's responsibility for such disclosures is
discussed in paragraphs 3.35 and 3.45.
     2.186 In a SOC 2+ examination, the service auditor needs to evaluate
whether the requirements of the process or control framework (additional cri-
teria) are suitable criteria. Paragraphs .A44–.A52 of AT-C section 105 provide
additional guidance on assessing the suitability of criteria. Likewise, the ser-
vice auditor needs to determine whether such criteria are or will be available
to the intended users. Paragraphs .A53–.A54 of AT-C section 105 provide ad-
ditional guidance on assessing the availability of criteria. In accordance with
paragraph .64 of AT-C section 205, if the additional criteria are appropriate
for or will be available to only a subset of intended users, the service auditor's
report should include an alert restricting the report's use to those users. Re-
stricting the service auditor's report is discussed further in paragraph 4.36.
     2.187 When the service organization uses subservice organizations, there
may be additional considerations in the SOC 2+ examination. For example, if
required controls are implemented at the subservice organization but manage-
ment has elected to use the carve-out method to present the subservice orga-
nization, the service auditor should determine whether the subject matter is
appropriate for the SOC 2+ examination. Based on the requirements in para-
graph .28 of AT-C section 105, if the service auditor determines that the sub-
ject matter is not appropriate, the service auditor should discuss with service
organization management the need to use the inclusive method. Unless man-
agement agrees to use the inclusive method, the service auditor may decide not
to accept the engagement.
    2.188 The scope of a SOC 2+ examination also includes the evaluation of
controls against additional criteria. In accordance with paragraph .08 of AT-
C section 205, the written agreement with the client about the terms of the
engagement should identify the additional criteria in addition to management's
and the service auditor's responsibilities related to them.
     2.189 Because the process or control framework represents additional cri-
teria, in accordance with paragraph .10 of AT-C section 205, the service auditor
should request that management's written assertion also address its evalua-
tion of whether the controls implemented by the service organization met the
requirements of the process or control framework.

Accepting and Planning a SOC 3 Examination
    2.190 For a SOC 3 examination, service organization management's re-
sponsibilities are substantially the same as those for a SOC 2 examination

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 2.190
86      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     except that management does not prepare a system description. Although man-
     agement does not prepare a system description, it does disclose the boundaries
     of the system and the service organization's principal service commitments and
     system requirements as part of its written assertion. That is discussed begin-
     ning in paragraph 4.119.
         2.191 Management's responsibilities, as the engaging party, during accep-
     tance and planning of a SOC 3 examination, include the following:

              • Defining
                2.05
                          the scope of the examination, as discussed in paragraph

              • Specifying  the principal service commitments made to user enti-
                ties and the system requirements needed to operate the system
              • Identifying  and analyzing risks that could prevent the service or-
                ganization from achieving its service commitments and system
                  requirements
              •   Designing, implementing, monitoring, and documenting effective
                  controls to provide reasonable assurance of achieving the service
                  organization's service commitments and system requirements
                  based on the applicable trust services criteria
              •   Identifying subservice organizations and determining whether to
                  present them under the inclusive or carve-out method and, if using
                  the carve-out method, identifying CSOCs, as discussed beginning
                  in paragraph 2.14 and throughout this chapter
          2.192 Because there is no description of the system in a SOC 3 report,
     some report users may not have a sufficient understanding of the service orga-
     nization's system to understand how controls within the system operate. Before
     agreeing on a SOC 3 examination, management and the service auditor need
     to consider whether a SOC 3 report, which includes only management's asser-
     tion and the service auditor's opinion about the effectiveness of controls at the
     service organization, is likely to meet the information needs of intended report
     users or whether it is likely that a SOC 3 report will be misunderstood by po-
     tential report users. For example, a service organization that provides security
     monitoring services to commercial customers may determine that a SOC 3 re-
     port is likely to be misunderstood by consumers of its commercial customer
     user entities because those consumers are unlikely to have an adequate un-
     derstanding of how commercial customers use the monitoring services. In such
     instances, management and the service auditor may agree to restrict the use of
     the SOC 3 report to the subset of potential report users (commercial customers)
     whose informational needs are likely to be met by a SOC 3 report.
          2.193 The lack of a description may cause some report users to misun-
     derstand a SOC 3 report of a service organization that uses a subservice or-
     ganization when the subservice organization is presented using the carve-out
     method. Although the use of the carve-out method is permitted, consideration
     should be given to whether use of the carve-out method for presenting a sub-
     service organization in a SOC 3 report may be misleading to users. A SOC 2
     report of a service organization that presents a subservice organization using
     the carve-out method includes a description of the services provided by the sub-
     service organization and describes the service organization's controls over those
     services, which permits report users to understand the role of the subservice
     organization in the context of the specific controls at the service organization. A
     SOC 3 report does not provide such information. In some cases, the disclosures

AAG-SOP 2.191                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                  Accepting and Planning a SOC 2 Examination                         87
discussed in paragraph 2.190 regarding the boundaries of the system would
include disclosure of the services performed by the carved-out subservice orga-
nization because it is likely to affect the boundary of the system to be addressed
in the examination. In that case, such disclosures may provide users with the
information they need to understand the role of the subservice organization and
the activities the service organization performs to monitor the subservice orga-
nization. If, however, disclosures regarding the boundaries of the system do not
contain sufficient information for users to understand how the carved-out sub-
service organization may affect the achievement of the service organization's
service commitments and system requirements in the SOC 3 report, there may
be a risk that the report will be misleading to report users. As a result, the SOC
3 report may need to be restricted to an appropriate subset of potential report
users, such as user entities that have access to a SOC 2 report or a SOC 3 report
from the subservice organization.
     2.194 Similarly, some report users may misunderstand a SOC 3 report
that indicates that CUECs are necessary, in combination with controls at the
service organization, to provide reasonable assurance that the service organi-
zation's service commitments and system requirements were achieved. How-
ever, without the information provided in a system description, some SOC 3
report users may not have a sufficient understanding of the service organiza-
tion's system to understand the context for implementing CUECs. As a result,
the service auditor may consider restricting the SOC 3 report to an appropriate
subset of potential report users that are likely to understand CUECs, such as
user entities that have access to detailed communications about the nature of
user entity responsibilities, CUECs, and how those CUECs interact with the
service organization's own controls.
     2.195 In a SOC 3 examination, the responsibilities of the service auditor
are substantially the same as those in a SOC 2 examination and include the
following:
        • Determining whether to accept or continue the engagement
        • Agreeing on the terms of the engagement
        • Reaching  an understanding with service organization manage-
          ment regarding the provision of a written assertion
        • Establishing an overall strategy for the examination
        • Performing risk assessment procedures




©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 2.195
                             Performing the SOC 2 Examination                           89
Chapter 3
  Performing the SOC 2 Examination
  This chapter discusses responding to the assessed risks, considering materi-
  ality, and other matters affecting the nature, timing, and extent of procedures
  the service auditor may perform to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence
  about whether (a) the description presents the system that was designed and
  implemented in accordance with the description criteria, (b) controls were
  suitably designed, and (c) in a type 2 examination, controls operated effec-
  tively.


  Introduction
      3.01 After the service auditor has assessed the risks of material misstate-
  ment, paragraphs .21–.22 of AT-C section 205, Assertion-Based Examination
  Engagements,1 discuss how the service auditor should respond to the assessed
  risks when designing and performing examination procedures with regard to
  the following:

            • The  presentation of the description in accordance with the descrip-
              tion criteria
            • The  suitability of design of controls to achieve the service com-
              mitments and system requirements based on the trust services
                  criteria
            •     For a type 2 engagement, the operating effectiveness of controls to
                  achieve the service commitments and system requirements based
                  on the trust services criteria
  Specifically, in accordance with those paragraphs, the service auditor should
  (a) design and implement overall responses to address the assessed risks of
  material misstatement and (b) design and perform further procedures whose
  nature, timing, and extent are based on, and responsive to, the assessed risks
  of material misstatement.


  Designing Overall Responses to the Risk Assessment
      3.02 The service auditor's assessment of the risk of material misstatement
  provides a basis for the design and implementation of procedures that are re-
  sponsive to the risk assessment.
       3.03 Aspects of the control environment or other components of inter-
  nal control may enhance or mitigate the effectiveness of specific system con-
  trols. Conversely, ineffective aspects of the control environment or other com-
  ponents of the service organization's internal control may cause the service
  auditor to design and perform further procedures whose nature, timing, and
  extent are based on, and responsive to, the higher assessed risks related to the


     1   All AT-C sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.



  ©2022, AICPA                                                             AAG-SOP 3.03
90      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     ineffective aspects of the control environment or other components of internal
     control.

          3.04 For example, consider a service organization that provides bonuses to
     employees who make no processing errors. In this environment, service organi-
     zation personnel may be tempted to suppress the reporting of errors to receive
     bonuses. The service auditor may decide to increase the testing of controls that
     prevent, or detect and correct, errors in system processing (for example, recon-
     ciliations of inputs to outputs designed to identify exceptions) or may decide to
     test the entire population to determine whether controls are operating effec-
     tively.

         3.05 Other overall responses a service auditor may select to address the
     assessed risks of material misstatement include the following:

             • Emphasizing   to the engagement team the need to maintain pro-
               fessional skepticism
             • Assigning more-experienced staff or using specialists
             • Providing more supervision
             • Incorporating  additional elements of unpredictability in the selec-
               tion of procedures to be performed
             • Making   changes to the nature, timing, or extent of procedures (for
               example, selecting different types of procedures, or changing the
                  timing of those procedures, to obtain evidence about the suitability
                  of design of controls and, in a type 2 examination, the operating
                  effectiveness of controls)

     Designing and Performing Procedures
         3.06 In accordance with paragraph .22 of AT-C section 205, the service au-
     ditor should design and perform further procedures whose nature, timing, and
     extent are based on, and responsive to, the assessed risks of material misstate-
     ment. Those further procedures relate to the presentation of the description in
     accordance with the description criteria and the suitability of design and oper-
     ating effectiveness of controls. Designing and performing further procedures is
     discussed further throughout this chapter.

     Considering Materiality in Responding to the Assessed Risks
          3.07 In accordance with paragraph .17 of AT-C section 205, the service
     auditor should consider materiality both during risk assessment and when de-
     termining the nature, timing, and extent of procedures to perform during the
     SOC 2 examination. Adoption of an appropriate materiality for each of the sub-
     ject matters in the SOC 2 examination, as discussed in chapter 2, "Accepting
     and Planning a SOC 2 Examination," allows the service auditor to prioritize
     testing efforts and supports an effective and efficient engagement.

         3.08 Paragraph .A19 of AT-C section 205 states that materiality in an at-
     testation engagement is considered in the context of qualitative factors and,
     when applicable, quantitative factors. The relative importance of each of those
     factors when considering materiality in a particular engagement is a matter
     of professional judgment, and those judgments are made considering the sur-
     rounding circumstances.


AAG-SOP 3.04                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                            Performing the SOC 2 Examination                         91
    3.09 In accordance with paragraph .17 of AT-C section 205, when consid-
ering materiality regarding the description, the service auditor should consider
whether there is substantial likelihood that description misstatements (includ-
ing omissions), individually or in the aggregate, would influence the judgment
made by the broad range of report users. Paragraph 3.84 discusses materiality
considerations when evaluating whether the description presents the system
that is designed and implemented in accordance with the description criteria.

    3.10 When considering materiality regarding the suitability of design and
operating effectiveness of controls, the service auditor should consider both
qualitative and quantitative factors, as discussed beginning in paragraph 3.85.


Obtaining Evidence About Whether the Description
Presents the System That Was Designed and Implemented
in Accordance With the Description Criteria
    3.11 As previously discussed, the description of the service organization's
system presented in accordance with the description criteria is designed to
enable user entities, business partners, and other intended users of the SOC
2 report (known collectively as report users) to understand the service orga-
nization's system, including the processing and flow of data and information
through and from the system, and other information that may be useful when
assessing the risks arising from interactions with the service organization's sys-
tem, particularly system controls that service organization management has
designed, implemented, and operated to provide reasonable assurance that its
service commitments and system requirements were achieved based on the
applicable trust services criteria. For example, disclosures about the types of
services provided, the environment in which the service organization operates,
and the components of the system used to provide such services allow users to
better understand the context in which the system controls operate.

     3.12 Service organization management is responsible for preparing the
description of the system that was designed and implemented in accordance
with the description criteria presented in DC section 200, 2018 Description Cri-
teria for a Description of a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2® Report
(With Revised Implementation Guidance — 2022).2 The service auditor is re-
sponsible for expressing an opinion about whether the description is prepared
in accordance with the description criteria and reflects the system and related
controls that the service organization has implemented. An unmodified opinion
that the description presents the system that was designed and implemented in
accordance with the description criteria does not imply that the controls stated
in the description are suitably designed or, in a type 2 examination, that con-
trols operated effectively.

    3.13 Generally, management prepares the description from documenta-
tion supporting the system of internal control and system operations and from
consideration of the policies, processes, and procedures (controls) within the
system used to provide the services.



   2   All DC sections can be found in AICPA Description Criteria.



©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP 3.13
92      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          3.14 Although the description is generally narrative in nature, there is
     no prescribed format for the description. Service organization management
     may organize the description in a variety of different ways, provided that dis-
     closures called for by the description criteria are included. For example, the
     description may be organized by components of internal control (the control
     environment, risk assessment process, control activities, monitoring activities,
     and information and communications). It may also be organized by components
     of the system (infrastructure, software, people, data, and processes and proce-
     dures). Management may use other logical groupings of information in organiz-
     ing its system description, including the use of recognized industry frameworks
     or standards based on management's objectives. For instance, the system de-
     scription may be organized by control families or control objectives listed in a
     process or control framework.
           3.15 Regardless of the method used to organize the system description,
     it is supplemented by disclosures of the aspects of the internal control compo-
     nents relevant to the identification and assessment of risks that would prevent
     the service organization from achieving its service commitments and system
     requirements and by disclosures of the design, implementation, and operation
     of controls to address those risks. It is good practice to map the controls listed
     back to the relevant criteria in each of the trust services categories to ensure
     the service organization's service commitments and system requirements were
     achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria. Flowcharts, matrixes,
     tables, graphics, context diagrams, or a combination thereof may be used to
     supplement the narratives contained within the description.
          3.16 The extent of disclosures included in the description may vary de-
     pending on the size and complexity of the service organization and its activ-
     ities. In addition, the description need not address every aspect of the ser-
     vice organization's system. For example, although the service organization may
     use both manual and automated systems to provide services to user entities,
     the description need not necessarily disclose every step in that process. Fur-
     thermore, if certain aspects of those services are not relevant to report users or
     are beyond the scope of the SOC 2 examination, the description need not ad-
     dress them. For example, a service organization's processes related to billing
     for services provided to user entities are unlikely to be relevant to report
     users.
          3.17 Although a description prepared in accordance with the description
     criteria is expected to include disclosures about each description criterion, such
     disclosures are not intended to be made at such a detailed level that they might
     increase the likelihood that a hostile party could exploit a security vulnerability,
     thereby compromising the service organization's ability to achieve its service
     commitments and system requirements. Instead, the disclosures are intended
     to enable report users to understand the nature of the risks faced by the service
     organization and the impact of the realization of those risks.
         3.18 When evaluating whether the description is presented in accordance
     with the description criteria, service organization management and the service
     auditor may consider the following:




AAG-SOP 3.14                                                           ©2022, AICPA
                      Performing the SOC 2 Examination                           93
Table 3-1
   Characteristics That May Indicate Whether the Description Is
      Presented in Accordance With the Description Criteria

    Characteristics That May                Characteristics That May
   Indicate the Description Is           Indicate the Description Is Not
  Presented in Accordance With            Presented in Accordance With
     the Description Criteria                the Description Criteria
The description includes the            The description states or implies
significant components of the system    certain facts that are not true (for
the service organization has            example, that system components
designed and implemented (placed        exist when they do not or that a
into operation).                        service organization's controls meet
                                        all requirements of a security
                                        process or control framework when
                                        they do not).
The description does not                The description states or implies
inadvertently or intentionally omit     that certain processes or controls
or distort information that is likely   have been implemented when they
to be relevant to intended users'       are not being performed.
decisions.
The description includes information    The description inadvertently or
about each description criterion, to    intentionally omits or distorts
the extent it is relevant to the        material information about any of
system being described, without         the description criteria that might
using language that omits or            affect the decisions of report users
distorts the information.               (for example, the failure to include
                                        in the description significant aspects
                                        of processing performed at another
                                        location included within the scope of
                                        the examination).
The description includes information    The description contains statements
relevant to users and which can be      that cannot be objectively evaluated
measured or evaluated based on the      (for example, unsubstantiated
description criteria.                   advertising claims such as
                                        describing a service organization as
                                        being "world's best" or "most
                                        respected in the industry").
The description is prepared at a        The description is prepared at such
level of detail likely to be            a high level that it omits significant
meaningful to intended users.           amounts of information relevant for
                                        decision-making by intended users.
The characteristics of the              Certain characteristics of the
presentation, such as the format, are   presentation of the description are
appropriate, given that the             confusing and obscure critical
description criteria allow for          information about the system.
variations in presentation.



©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP 3.18
94      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          3.19 Implementation guidance for each criterion, which is presented in DC
     section 200, is intended to assist management when preparing the description
     and the service auditor when evaluating whether the description is presented
     in accordance with the description criteria. The guidance presents factors to
     consider when making judgments about the nature and extent of disclosures
     called for by each criterion. The implementation guidance does not address all
     possible situations; therefore, service organization management and the ser-
     vice auditor may need to consider other facts and circumstances of the service
     organization and its environment when applying the description criteria.
         3.20 The service auditor's procedures for evaluating whether the descrip-
     tion is in accordance with the description criteria begin with obtaining and
     reading the description of the service organization's system and evaluating
     whether it presents the system that was designed and implemented based on
     the service auditor's understanding of the system and other relevant proce-
     dures performed. In addition to the more specific procedures described in the
     remainder of this section, the service auditor may perform any of the follow-
     ing procedures, or a combination thereof, to obtain evidence about whether the
     description presents the system that was designed and implemented in accor-
     dance with the description criteria:

             • Making inquiries of management and other service organization
               personnel about the content of management's assertion and the
                 description of the system
             •   Reading the service organization's annual report, if there is one,
                 to understand the service organization's objectives and strategy
                 and their relationship to the services provided to user entities
             •   Inspecting documentation supporting the service organization's
                 identification and assessment of risks, including the determina-
                 tion of how the service organization plans to mitigate such risks
             •   Reading documents (such as board minutes, organization charts,
                 and communications about the security, availability, and process-
                 ing integrity of the system and the confidentiality or privacy of the
                 information it uses) to understand the service organization's risk
                 governance structure and processes, including

                      — the involvement of board members,
                      — the organizational structure to support the service orga-
                        nization's system,
                      — the threat and vulnerability assessments the service or-
                        ganization performs (both internal and external), and
                      — the types and frequency of communications made to ex-
                        ecutive management and others about the security, avail-
                        ability, and processing integrity of the system and the
                        confidentiality or privacy of the information it uses

             • Reading documents about the service organization's security
               awareness and training programs, communication of code of con-
                 duct, employee handbooks, information security policies, incident
                 notification procedures, and other available documentation to un-
                 derstand the service organization's processes for communicating
                 to service organization personnel their responsibilities for system
                 security and other related matters

AAG-SOP 3.19                                                        ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                               95
         • Reading internal audit reports, third-party assessments, audit
           committee presentations, and other documentation related to the
             service organization's monitoring activities, system incidents, or
             investigative activities
         •   Reading documents describing laws, regulations, or industry stan-
             dards relevant to the service organization's service commitments
             and system requirements

     3.21 If the service auditor believes that the description is misstated or
otherwise misleading, the service auditor ordinarily would ask service organi-
zation management to amend the description by including the omitted infor-
mation or by revising the misstated or otherwise inappropriate information.
If service organization management refuses to amend the description, and the
service auditor concludes that the description is not in accordance with the de-
scription criteria, in all material respects, the service auditor should modify the
opinion in accordance with paragraph .72 of AT-C section 205.

     3.22 Determining whether the description of a service organization's
system presents the system that was implemented also involves evaluating
whether each control stated in the description has been implemented. The ser-
vice auditor's procedures to determine whether the controls stated in the de-
scription have been implemented may be similar to, and performed in conjunc-
tion with, procedures to obtain an understanding of the system as discussed in
chapter 2. In addition, the procedures described beginning in paragraph 3.50
may be performed to obtain evidence about whether the controls stated in the
description have been implemented.

     3.23 If the service auditor determines that certain controls identified in
the description have not been implemented, the service auditor may ask ser-
vice organization management to delete those controls from the description. If
management does not remove the controls from the description, and the service
auditor concludes that the description is not in accordance with the description
criteria, in all material respects, the service auditor should modify the opin-
ion on the description in accordance with paragraph .72 of AT-C section 205.
Paragraph 4.77 presents a separate paragraph that would be added to the ser-
vice auditor's report when the description includes controls that have not been
implemented. In addition, when evaluating the suitability of the design and,
in a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness of the controls, failure to
implement those controls may result in controls not being suitably designed.
(Paragraph 3.176 discusses a situation in which controls do not operate during
the period of the examination.)

Disclosures About the Types of Services Provided
    3.24 Description criterion DC1 requires that service organization man-
agement include in the description certain disclosures about the types of ser-
vices provided by the service organization. Disclosures about the types of ser-
vices provided by the service organization would generally focus on the services
that relate to the systems that are within the scope of the SOC 2 examina-
tion. Description criterion DC1 also contains implementation guidance that is
intended to assist service auditors when evaluating the nature and extent of
disclosures about the services provided. For example, the implementation guid-
ance indicates that when the SOC 2 examination addresses privacy, disclosures
about the types of services provided by the service organization should clearly

©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP 3.24
96      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     identify whether the service organization functions as a data processor or data
     controller.
         3.25 When evaluating the nature and extent of disclosures about the ser-
     vices provided by the service organization, the service auditor may perform a
     combination of the following procedures:
             a. Reading the service organization's annual report, if there is one, to
                understand the nature of the service organization's operations and
                the types of services provided
             b. Reading contracts with customers and business partners (such as
                performance or service-level agreements), marketing materials dis-
                tributed to customers and business partners or posted on the ser-
                vice organization's website, and other available documentation to
                better understand the specific services provided
             c. Reading other documents related to the services provided by the
                service organization

     Disclosures About Service Commitments and
     System Requirements
          3.26 As discussed in chapter 2, service organization management is re-
     sponsible for designing, implementing, and operating the system to achieve
     its service commitments to user entities and the system requirements that
     are necessary to enable the system to achieve those commitments and com-
     ply with laws and regulations. Description criterion DC2 requires disclosure
     of only the service organization's principal service commitments and system
     requirements. Disclosure of the principal service commitments and system re-
     quirements enables SOC 2 report users to understand how the system operates
     and how management and the service auditor evaluated the suitability of the
     design of controls and, in a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness of
     controls based on the trust services criteria.
         3.27 The service commitments that a service organization makes to user
     entities vary based on the needs of the user entities. Service organization man-
     agement need not disclose every service commitment to every user entity; how-
     ever, it should disclose those that are likely to be useful to the broad range of
     SOC 2 report users.
         3.28 Likewise, management usually discloses only the principal system
     requirements that are relevant to or affected by the trust services category or
     categories addressed by the examination. When identifying which system re-
     quirements to disclose, service organization management may consider matters
     such as internal policies that are relevant to the system being described, key
     decisions made in the design and operation of the system, and other business
     requirements for the system. For example, management would ordinarily not
     disclose internal requirements related to the operating margin for the services
     associated with the system because such information is unlikely to be useful to
     the broad range of SOC 2 report users.
         3.29 Description criterion DC2 contains implementation guidance that is
     intended to assist with the evaluation of the nature and extent of disclosures
     about principal service commitments and system requirements. An example of
     disclosure of a service organization's principal service commitments and system
     requirements is available on the AICPA website.

AAG-SOP 3.25                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                              97
     3.30 Disclosure of the types of system commitments and system re-
quirements made or a reference to an external source of such information is
not considered disclosure of the principal service commitments or system re-
quirements. Furthermore, such disclosure is unlikely to provide report users
with sufficient information to understand the application of the trust services
criteria.
    3.31 When deciding whether disclosures about principal service commit-
ments and system requirements are appropriate, the service auditor may con-
sider matters such as the following:
        a. Are the principal service commitments presented in sufficient de-
           tail for report users to understand the relationship between the
           controls implemented by the service organization and the service
           commitments and system requirements? For example, a service or-
           ganization commits to implement certain system components at a
           second data center to mirror transaction data on a real-time basis
           to meet a commitment to provide failover processing in the event of
           a disruption of services. When describing its availability commit-
           ment, service organization management would generally include
           such details to enable users of the report to better understand the
           organization's failover procedures.
        b. When the SOC 2 report is designed for a broad range of users, does
           the description disclose the principal service commitments that are
           common to such report users? For example, assume a service or-
           ganization makes a general system availability commitment to all
           user entities but makes additional service-level agreements to oth-
           ers. In such situations, the description may be presented in accor-
           dance with the description criteria if it discloses as a principal ser-
           vice commitment the availability commitments made commonly to
           all user entities but not the availability commitments made to spe-
           cific user entities.

Considering the Appropriateness of the Service Organization’s Service
Commitments and System Requirements During the Examination
     3.32 After accepting the SOC 2 examination, the service auditor may be-
come aware of information that causes him or her to believe that the principal
service commitments and system requirements stated in the description are
not, in fact, appropriate for the engagement. A failure to disclose principal ser-
vice commitments or system requirements may cause the practitioner to ques-
tion whether management also failed to identify its service commitments and
system requirements for risk assessment purposes and, as a result, controls
may not be suitably designed or operating effectively.
     3.33 During the performance of further procedures, for example, the ser-
vice auditor may become aware of information that contradicts information pre-
viously obtained. Assume, for example, that the service organization provides
insurance underwriting software-as-a-service that uses both publicly available
data and purchased proprietary data. The service organization has not estab-
lished system requirements related to the completeness and accuracy of the
data obtained from public sources. Because the service organization did not es-
tablish such a system requirement, it failed to identify and assess the risks
that such requirements would not be achieved. In addition, it did not design,
implement, and operate controls to mitigate such risks or disclose any principal

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 3.33
98      SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

     system requirement related to that data. Accordingly, the service organization's
     service commitments and system requirements are incomplete and, therefore,
     not appropriate in the circumstances. In this situation, the service auditor may
     conclude that a modification of the opinion is appropriate because of either of
     the following:

              • The service commitments and system requirements identified in
                the description in accordance with description criterion DC2 are
                  not appropriate; therefore, the description is not presented in ac-
                  cordance with the description criteria.
              •   Controls over the objective-setting process were not suitably de-
                  signed and the service organization's controls were not effective
                  to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's
                  service commitments and system requirements were achieved
                  based on CC3.1, The entity specifies objectives with sufficient clar-
                  ity to enable the identification and assessment of risks relating to
                  objectives.
     In such a situation, the service auditor would generally discuss the matter with
     service organization management. If service organization management refuses
     to amend the description and the service auditor concludes that the description
     is not in accordance with the description criteria, in all material respects, the
     service auditor should modify the opinion in accordance with paragraph .72 of
     AT-C section 205.
          3.34 Because the service commitments and system requirements need to
     be appropriate to enable both service organization management and the ser-
     vice auditor to evaluate whether system controls are suitably designed and, in
     a type 2 examination, operating effectively, the lack of appropriate service com-
     mitments and system requirements may have a pervasive effect on the SOC
     2 examination. In such situations, an adverse opinion on the description, the
     suitability of controls, and in a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness
     of controls, would be appropriate. Expressing an adverse opinion in a SOC 2
     examination is discussed beginning in paragraph 4.57.

     Disclosures About Components of the System
         3.35 Description criterion DC3 requires that service organization man-
     agement include in the description an identification and discussion of the com-
     ponents of the system used to provide the services, including the (a) infrastruc-
     ture, (b) software, (c) people, (d) procedures, and (e) data. Description criterion
     DC3 also contains implementation guidance for evaluating the nature and ex-
     tent of disclosures about components of the system.
          3.36 When evaluating the nature and extent of disclosures about compo-
     nents of the system, the service auditor may perform procedures including the
     following:
             a. Reading sample contracts with users (for example, contract tem-
                plates or a selection of contracts) and associated performance or
                service-level agreements and other documentation to understand
                the nature of the inputs provided by users
             b. Reading policy and procedure manuals, system documentation,
                flowcharts, narratives, hardware asset management records, and
                other system documentation to understand the service organiza-
                tion's use of technology, including its applications, infrastructure,

AAG-SOP 3.34                                                          ©2022, AICPA
                            Performing the SOC 2 Examination                          99
              network architecture, use of mobile devices, use of cloud technolo-
              gies, and the types of external party access or connectivity to the
              system
          c. Comparing the service auditor's understanding of the system ob-
             tained through the performance of procedures to assess the suit-
             ability of design and operating effectiveness of controls to informa-
             tion obtained from other sources

    3.37 Description of the procedures implemented by the service organiza-
tion may include information about the service organization's risk assessment
process and disclosure of significant risks identified by that process. These dis-
closures may assist user entities in identifying risks related to their use of the
services provided by the service organization. If such disclosures are included,
the service auditor would need to make sure that they are consistent with the
evidence obtained to support an opinion on the description. For example, the
service auditor's review of management risk assessment documentation dur-
ing risk assessment may help the service auditor make that determination.

Disclosures About System Incidents
     3.38 Description criterion DC4 requires that service organization manage-
ment include in the description certain information related to system incidents
that (a) were the result of controls that were not suitably designed or operating
effectively or (b) otherwise resulted in a significant failure in the achievement
of one or more of service commitments and system requirements, as of the date
of the description (for a type 1 examination) or during the period of time covered
by the description (for a type 2 examination), as applicable.
     3.39 Both DC section 200 and TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Crite-
ria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy
(With Revised Points of Focus — 2022),3 provide the following definitions to as-
sist service organization management and the service auditor in determining
if an incident has occurred:
           system event. An occurrence that could lead to the loss of, or dis-
             ruption to, operations, services, or functions and result in a service
             organization's failure to achieve its service commitments or sys-
             tem requirements. Such an occurrence may arise from actual or at-
             tempted unauthorized access or use by internal or external parties
             and (a) impair (or potentially impair) the availability, integrity, or
             confidentiality of information or systems; (b) result in unauthorized
             disclosure or theft of information or other assets or the destruction
             or corruption of data; or (c) cause damage to systems. Such occur-
             rences also may arise from the failure of the system to process data
             as designed or from the loss, corruption, or destruction of data used
             by the system.
           system incident. A system event that requires action on the part of
             service organization management to prevent or reduce the impact
             of the event on the service organization's achievement of its service
             commitments and system requirements.


   3   All TSP sections can be found in AICPA Trust Services Criteria.


©2022, AICPA                                                             AAG-SOP 3.39
100   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

      3.40 If service organization management determines that a system in-
  cident as defined in description criterion DC4 has occurred, the description
  should include the following information about each incident:

          • Nature of the incident
          • Timing surrounding the incident
          • Extent (or effect) of the incident and its disposition
      3.41 The following illustrates a disclosure made about an identified sys-
  tem incident that resulted in a significant failure of the service organization to
  achieve one of its availability commitments:
           In February 20XX, XYZ experienced a denial-of-service attack on its
           transportation management system (TMS) that supports the trans-
           portation management services provided to its customers. The attack
           impaired the ability of the system to operate as designed. Although
           XYZ's security team and engineers resolved the issue through redis-
           tribution of traffic and systems, the TMS suffered a significant disrup-
           tion and customers were unable to schedule or receive transportation
           for five days. Accordingly, the attack prevented XYZ from achieving its
           commitment that the maximum duration of a loss of system availabil-
           ity would be no more than 24 hours.
  System incidents are not limited to security breaches. For instance, an outage
  at a cloud service provider that caused disruption of service may necessitate
  disclosure if it significantly affected the service organization's achievement of
  its service commitments and system requirements regarding availability.
       3.42 When evaluating the completeness, nature, and extent of disclosures
  about system incidents, the service auditor may perform a combination of the
  following procedures:

          • Understanding    service organization management's process for
            identifying and evaluating the significance of system incidents
          • Obtaining  the listing of system incidents and their resolution for
            the examination period from the incident ticketing system and
               reperforming an independent evaluation of the significance of
               such incidents
          •    Inquiring of service organization management and inspecting doc-
               umentation about the resolution of significant incidents that oc-
               curred during the prior period
          •    Inspecting documentation related to the remediation of significant
               system incidents
      3.43 After performing these procedures, the service auditor may conclude
  that there were no significant system incidents during the period. Although not
  required by DC4, if no significant incidents occurred during the examination
  period, management may include a statement in the description to that effect.
       3.44 If management includes in the description disclosures about identi-
  fied system incidents as defined in description criterion DC4, the service auditor
  is likely to conclude that those incidents resulted from controls that were not
  suitably designed or operating effectively. In such instances, a modified opin-
  ion on suitability of design or operating effectiveness, or both, would be appro-
  priate.

AAG-SOP 3.40                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                             Performing the SOC 2 Examination                                       101
Disclosures About Individual Controls
     3.45 Description criterion DC5 requires that the description disclose the
applicable trust services criteria (that is, those that relate to the categories ad-
dressed by the description) and the related controls designed and implemented
to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commit-
ments and system requirements were achieved. For example, if the description
addresses availability, service organization management would provide infor-
mation about the controls it has implemented to address the common crite-
ria in the trust services criteria and the additional trust services criteria for
availability.
     3.46 In addition to describing only controls that have been implemented,
the description should provide sufficient details about each control to enable re-
port users, particularly user entities and business partners, to understand how
each control may affect their interactions with the service organization. Table
3-2 presents information about each control that generally would be included
in the description.

Table 3-2
     Information About Controls to Be Included in the Description
                           of the System

    Information to Be
      Included in a
     Description of a
         Control                                     Illustrative Control
 What: The subject                 Requests for changes to production, source,
 matter to which the               and object code4 are initiated by preparing and
 control is applied                submitting a change ticket to the Change Control
                                   Board for approval. The system automatically
                                   logs changes made to production, source, and
                                   object code. On a weekly basis, the change
                                   manager reviews the log of system changes and
                                   the approved change tickets to identify
                                   unauthorized and missing changes by
                                   determining that (1) there is an approved change
                                   ticket for each entry in the log and (2) all the
                                   changes identified in the approved change tickets
                                   have been recorded in the log. Any unauthorized
                                   or missing changes are entered into an incident
                                   record in the Incident Management System.
                                   Incident records are assigned to the application
                                   manager of the affected application for follow-up
                                   and resolution. The change manager tracks open
                                   records to resolution and prepares a weekly
                                   report to the vice president of application
                                   development.

                                                                                       (continued)


     4 Boldface italics in the right-hand column of this table indicate text that specifically answers

the questions posed in the left-hand column.


©2022, AICPA                                                                         AAG-SOP 3.46
102   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

      Information About Controls to Be Included in the Description
                      of the System — continued

      Information to Be
        Included in a
       Description of a
           Control                          Illustrative Control
   Who: The party            Requests for changes to production, source, and
   responsible for           object code are initiated by preparing and
   performing the control    submitting a change ticket to the Change
                             Control Board for approval. The system
                             automatically logs changes made to production,
                             source, and object code. On a weekly basis, the
                             change manager reviews the log of system
                             changes and the approved change tickets to
                             identify unauthorized and missing changes by
                             determining that (1) there is an approved change
                             ticket for each entry in the log and (2) all the
                             changes identified in the approved change tickets
                             have been recorded in the log. Any unauthorized
                             or missing changes are entered into an incident
                             record in the Incident Management System.
                             Incident records are assigned to the application
                             manager of the affected application for follow-up
                             and resolution. The change manager tracks
                             open records to resolution and prepares a weekly
                             report to the vice president of application
                             development.
   How: The nature of the    Requests for changes to production, source, and
   activity performed,       object codes are initiated by preparing and
   including sources of      submitting a change ticket to the Change
   information used in       Control Board for approval. The system
   performing the control    automatically logs changes made to production,
                             source, and object codes. On a weekly basis, the
                             change manager reviews the log of system
                             changes and the approved change tickets to
                             identify unauthorized and missing changes
                             by determining that (1) there is an approved
                             change ticket for each entry in the log and
                             (2) all the changes identified in the approved
                             change tickets have been recorded in the log.
                             Any unauthorized or missing changes are
                             entered into an incident record in the
                             Incident Management System. Incident
                             records are assigned to the application manager
                             of the affected application for follow-up and
                             resolution. The change manager tracks open
                             records to resolution and prepares a weekly
                             report to the vice president of application
                             development.




AAG-SOP 3.46                                                     ©2022, AICPA
                        Performing the SOC 2 Examination                          103
    Information About Controls to Be Included in the Description
                    of the System — continued

   Information to Be
     Included in a
    Description of a
        Control                             Illustrative Control
 When: The frequency         Requests for changes to production, source, and
 with which the control      object code are initiated by preparing and
 is performed, or the        submitting a change ticket to the Change Control
 timing of its occurrence    Board for approval. The system automatically
                             logs changes made to production, source, and
                             object code. On a weekly basis, the change
                             manager reviews the log of system changes and
                             the approved change tickets to identify
                             unauthorized and missing changes by
                             determining that (1) there is an approved change
                             ticket for each entry in the log and (2) all the
                             changes identified in the approved change tickets
                             have been recorded in the log. Any unauthorized
                             or missing changes are entered into an incident
                             record in the Incident Management System.
                             Incident records are assigned to the application
                             manager of the affected application for follow-up
                             and resolution. The change manager tracks open
                             records to resolution and prepares a weekly
                             report to the vice president of application
                             development.

    3.47 Although service organization management may describe the sys-
tem controls in the description, it also might refer to a table of controls pre-
sented in a separate section of the SOC 2 report. If the description refers to a
table of controls, the table is considered part of the description; therefore, it is
addressed by the service auditor's examination. Often, as noted later, the ser-
vice auditor describes the tests of controls performed and the results thereof
in the same table. Guidance on the types of information to be included in the
description of tests of controls and the results thereof is discussed beginning in
paragraph 4.25.
     3.48 When deciding how best to present controls, service organization
management may select the format that best meets its objectives, the needs
of its users, and its users' likely frame of reference; it may also consider the
risk that use of a particular format may be misleading to users. The service
auditor would generally consider similar factors when evaluating whether the
description is presented in accordance with the description criteria. Common
formats for presenting controls in a SOC 2 report are included in the following
examples:
Example 1:

         • Controls,  organized by trust services category and criteria, are
           presented in a table in section 4.
         • The service auditor's description of the tests performed and the
           results of such tests are presented alongside the controls.

©2022, AICPA                                                          AAG-SOP 3.48
104   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  Under this format, a control is often listed multiple times when it addresses
  more than one trust services criterion. The service auditor may choose to
  present the description of tests performed and the results of such tests only the
  first time the control is presented; later instances of the control can be cross-
  referenced back to the first.
  Example 2:

          • Controls, organized by service organization process (for instance,
            identity and access management, security incident management,
               change management) are presented in section 4.
          •    The service auditor's description of tests performed and the re-
               sults of such tests are presented alongside the control.
          •    The relationship of the controls to the trust services criteria is pre-
               sented in a separate table, typically organized by trust services cri-
               teria, in either section 3 or section 4. This format allows the details
               of a control to be listed only once. For cross-referencing purposes,
               controls are identified by a unique identifier that is used in both
               tables. The unique identifier may be a control name, a number,
               (such as 1, 2, 3) or a reference to the schema used by another pro-
               cess or control framework (for instance, AC-1, AC-2, or SR-12 from
               National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special
               Publication (SP) 800-53, Security and Privacy Controls for Infor-
               mation Systems and Organizations). To prevent the presentation
               from being misleading, both tables may include information about
               any deviations noted.
  Example 3:
  Example 3 is similar to example 2, but instead of listing controls by service or-
  ganization process, controls are grouped using the organizational structure of a
  security process or control framework such as the NIST Cybersecurity Frame-
  work (NIST CSF).
       3.49 A service organization may have controls that it considers to be out-
  side the boundaries of the system within the scope of the engagement, such as
  controls related to the conversion of new user entities to the service organiza-
  tion's systems. To avoid any misunderstanding by report users, the description
  should clearly delineate the boundaries of the system included within the scope
  of the engagement.
       3.50 The service auditor may perform a variety of procedures to obtain
  evidence about the nature and extent of disclosures related to individual con-
  trols and the applicable trust services criteria, including a combination of the
  following:

          • Reading  contracts with customers and business partners, such
            as performance or service-level agreements, marketing materials
               distributed to customers and business partners or posted on the
               service organization's website, and other available documentation
               to evaluate whether the controls the service organization has im-
               plemented are suitably designed to achieve the service organiza-
               tion's commitments to customers
          •    Observing controls or other activities performed by service orga-
               nization personnel

AAG-SOP 3.49                                                        ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                       105
        • Reading documents about the service organization's security
          awareness and training programs, communication of code of con-
             duct, employee handbooks, security policies, incident notification
             procedures, and other available documentation to understand the
             service organization's processes for communicating to service or-
             ganization personnel their responsibilities for system security and
             other related matters
        •    Reading policy and procedure manuals, system documentation,
             flowcharts, narratives, asset management records, and other sys-
             tem documentation to understand IT policies and procedures and
             controls over data loss prevention, access provisioning and de-
             provisioning, user identification and authentication, data destruc-
             tion, system event monitoring and detection, and backup proce-
             dures
        •    Reading sample contracts with subservice organizations and
             associated performance or service-level agreements and other
             documentation to understand how the service organization's
             contracting process addresses security-related matters; the inter-
             relationship between the service organization and its subservice
             organizations, including the service organization's process for as-
             sessing and managing system risks associated with those subser-
             vice organizations; the process the service organization uses to
             identify its responsibilities for implementing controls that have
             been communicated by a subservice organization (for example,
             user entity responsibilities or complementary user entity controls
             [CUECs] identified in a subservice organization's contract); and
             the procedures the service organization performs to monitor the
             effectiveness of controls performed by subservice organizations,
             when complementary subservice organization controls (CSOCs)
             have been identified
        •    Reading incident response and recovery plan documentation to
             understand the service organization's processes for recovering
             from identified system events, including its incident response pro-
             cedures, incident communication protocols, recovery procedures,
             alternate processing plans, and procedures for the periodic test-
             ing of recovery procedures

     3.51 Performing walk-throughs provides evidence about whether the con-
trols stated in the description have been implemented. Performing a walk-
through involves making inquiries of service organization management and
other personnel and requesting them to describe and demonstrate their ac-
tions in performing a procedure. Walk-through procedures include following a
transaction, event, or activity from origination until final disposition through
the service organization's system using the same documents used by service
organization personnel. Walk-through procedures usually include a combina-
tion of inquiry, observation, inspection of relevant documentation, flowcharts,
questionnaires, or decision tables to facilitate understanding the design of the
controls. Such procedures enable the service auditor to gain a sufficient under-
standing of the controls to determine whether they have been implemented as
stated in the description of the service organization's system.

    3.52 During a walk-through, the service auditor may inquire about in-
stances during the period in which controls did not operate as described or

©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP 3.52
106   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  designed. In addition, the service auditor may inquire about variations in the
  process for different types of events or transactions. For example, the service
  organization's processing may take different forms, depending on how informa-
  tion is collected from user entities and business partners. Assume, for example,
  that the service organization receives transactions by mail, phone, fax, voice
  response unit, or via the internet. The service organization may design differ-
  ent controls related to the way the information is collected. An appropriately
  performed walk-through provides an opportunity to verify the service auditor's
  understanding of the flow of transactions and the design of the controls. If prop-
  erly performed, walk-throughs may provide evidence about whether controls
  included in the description, individually or in combination with other controls,
  were suitably designed and implemented and, in a type 2 examination, oper-
  ated effectively.

  Disclosures About Complementary User Entity Controls and
  User Entity Responsibilities
       3.53 As discussed in chapter 2, CUECs are controls that are necessary,
  in combination with the service organization's controls, to provide reasonable
  assurance that the service organization's service commitments and system re-
  quirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria. When
  there are CUECs, description criterion DC6 requires that the description con-
  tain certain disclosures about those controls, including a statement that user
  entities are responsible for implementing those CUECs.
      3.54 As it relates to CUECs, the description is presented in accordance
  with the description criteria if the CUECs are complete, accurately described,
  and necessary as discussed in paragraph 3.53. When making this evaluation,
  the service auditor may review system documentation and contracts with user
  entities, make inquiries of service organization personnel, and perform other
  such procedures as considered necessary.
       3.55 For a user entity to derive the intended benefits of using the services
  of the service organization, the user entity has certain additional responsibili-
  ties related to the system. For example, the user of an express delivery service
  is responsible for providing complete and accurate recipient information and
  for using appropriate packaging materials. In this guide, such responsibilities
  are referred to as user entity responsibilities.
      3.56 Trust services criterion CC2.3 states, The entity communicates with
  external parties regarding matters affecting the functioning of internal control,
  which would include communication of user responsibilities. Because user re-
  sponsibilities are frequently voluminous, it is often impractical to communicate
  them in the description of the system; instead, they are usually communicated
  through other methods (for example, by describing them in user manuals). As
  a result, description criterion DC6 does not require that service organization
  management disclose user entity responsibilities. Instead, management ordi-
  narily identifies in the description the types of communications it makes to ex-
  ternal users, particularly user entities, about user entity responsibilities. The
  form and content of such disclosures is the responsibility of service organization
  management.
       3.57 If service organization management has referred to the communica-
  tions of user entity responsibilities that relate only to specific users, the ser-
  vice auditor would need to consider whether other intended users of the SOC 2

AAG-SOP 3.53                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                        Performing the SOC 2 Examination                          107
report are likely to misunderstand the description. If the service auditor be-
lieves the description is likely to be misunderstood, the service auditor would
need to restrict the report to those specified parties to whom the responsibilities
relate. If service organization management does not want the report to be re-
stricted, management would include the significant user entity responsibilities
in the description of the service organization's system to prevent users from
misunderstanding the system and the service auditor's report. In that case,
the service auditor's report would be appropriate for the broad range of SOC 2
report users.

     3.58 When the description includes significant user entity responsibili-
ties, the service auditor would need to evaluate those disclosures as part of the
evaluation about whether the description is presented in accordance with the
description criteria.

Disclosures Related to Subservice Organizations
    3.59 When the service organization uses a subservice organization, de-
scription criterion DC7 requires that certain disclosures about the subservice
organization be included in the description. The disclosures to be included de-
pend on whether service organization management has selected the carve-out
method or inclusive method, as discussed in chapter 2.

Disclosures When Using the Inclusive Method
    3.60 When the inclusive method is used to present the services provided
by a subservice organization, description criterion DC7 requires disclosure of
the following information:


         • The nature of the service provided by the subservice organization
         • The controls at the subservice organization that are necessary, in
           combination with the service organization's controls, to provide
             reasonable assurance that the service organization's service com-
             mitments and system requirements are achieved based on the ap-
             plicable trust services criteria
         •   Relevant aspects of the subservice organization's infrastructure,
             software, people, procedures, and data
         •   The portions of the system that are attributable to the subservice
             organization

     3.61 The description of controls at the subservice organization may also
include aspects of the subservice organization's control environment, risk as-
sessment process, information and communications, and monitoring activities
to the extent that they are relevant to controls at the service organization. The
description should separately identify controls at the service organization and
controls at the subservice organization; however, there is no prescribed format
for differentiating between the two.

     3.62 In addition, it may be useful for the service organization to disclose its
interactions with vendors related to the services provided by them. When such
disclosures are made, it may be helpful if service organization management
distinguishes between the services provided by subservice organizations and
vendors.

©2022, AICPA                                                          AAG-SOP 3.62
108   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  Disclosures When Using the Carve-Out Method
      3.63 When the carve-out method is used, management would not include
  a description of the controls that operate at the subservice organization. Nev-
  ertheless, the description should contain sufficient information concerning the
  carved-out services to do the following:
          • Alert report users to the fact that another entity (the subservice
            organization) is involved in the processing of the user entities'
               or business partners' transactions, to enable report users to un-
               derstand the significance and relevance of the subservice organi-
               zation's services to the achievement of the service organization's
               service commitments and system requirements based on the ap-
               plicable trust services criteria
          •    Identify the types of controls that service organization manage-
               ment assumes would be implemented by the subservice organi-
               zation and that are necessary, in combination with controls at
               the service organization, to provide reasonable assurance that the
               service organization's service commitments and system require-
               ments are achieved (complementary subservice organization con-
               trols or CSOCs) based on the applicable trust services criteria
               (CSOCs are discussed further starting at paragraph 3.69)
      3.64 When the carve-out method is used, description criterion DC7 re-
  quires disclosure of the following information:
          • The nature of the service provided by the subservice organization
          • Each of the applicable trust services criteria that are intended to
            be met by controls at the subservice organization
          • The types of controls that service organization management as-
            sumed, in the design of the service organization's system, would
               be implemented by the subservice organization and that are nec-
               essary, in combination with controls at the service organization, to
               provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's ser-
               vice commitments and system requirements are achieved
  The description would not include the detailed processing or controls performed
  by the subservice organization.

  Considerations Applicable to Both Methods
       3.65 The description of the services provided by a subservice organization
  should be prepared at a level of detail that could reasonably be expected to
  meet the common informational needs of the broad range of report users. The
  following is an example of a description of a service organization that uses a
  subservice organization to provide its computer processing infrastructure:
           Trust Group Service Organization outsources aspects of its computer
           processing to Computer Outsourcing Subservice Organization.
  This description may not be detailed enough to enable report users to de-
  termine the significance of the services provided by the subservice organiza-
  tion. The following is a more detailed description that provides the necessary
  information:
           Trust Group Service Organization hosts its Trust System at Com-
           puter Outsourcing Subservice Organization. Trust Group maintains
           responsibility for application changes and user access, and Computer

AAG-SOP 3.63                                                     ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                         109
         Outsourcing Subservice Organization provides the computer process-
         ing infrastructure and changes thereto.

    3.66 Regardless of whether the carve-out or inclusive method is selected,
service organization management is not required to disclose the identity of the
subservice organization. However, that information may be helpful to report
users (particularly user entities and business partners) who wish to obtain in-
formation about and perform procedures related to the services provided by
the subservice organization. If the description does not disclose the identity of
the subservice organization, the service auditor may discuss this matter with
management and explain why such information may be needed by some report
users.

     3.67 Additionally, regardless of the method used, service organization
management is responsible for designing, implementing, and operating con-
trols and other activities to monitor the effectiveness of controls performed by
the subservice organization; such monitoring should be described in the system
description. Monitoring activities are usually a necessary part of the service or-
ganization's system of internal control; in other words, they are necessary for
controls to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service
commitments and system requirements are achieved. These types of activities
are evaluated using trust services criterion CC9.2, The entity assesses and man-
ages risks associated with vendors and business partners.

     3.68 Monitoring activities usually include some combination of (a) ongo-
ing monitoring to determine that potential issues are identified timely and (b)
separate evaluations to determine that subservice organization controls are
effective over time. Examples of monitoring activities include reviewing and
reconciling output reports, holding periodic discussions with subservice orga-
nization personnel, making regular site visits to the subservice organization,
the internal audit function performing tests of controls at the subservice or-
ganization, reviewing type 1 or type 2 SOC reports on the subservice organi-
zation's system, and monitoring external communications (such as customer
complaints) relevant to the services provided by the subservice organization.

Disclosures About Complementary Subservice Organization Controls
     3.69 As discussed in chapter 2, when using the carve-out method, the
achievement of one or more of the service organization's service commitments
or system requirements is dependent on one or more controls at the subservice
organization. Such controls are called complementary subservice organization
controls (CSOCs). In such a situation, description criterion DC7 requires that
the description identify such CSOCs. To be meaningful to report users, CSOCs
included in the description are those that are specific to the services provided
by the service organization's system. Typically, service organization manage-
ment presents the CSOCs as broad categories of controls or types of controls
that the subservice organization should have in place. For example, the service
organization might identify the following CSOC to address CC6.1, The entity
implements logical access security software, infrastructure, and architectures
over protected information assets to protect them from security events to meet
the entity's objectives:
         Logical access to system infrastructure is restricted by native operat-
         ing system and application-based security through the use of access
         control lists.

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 3.69
110   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  This broad category of control is more appropriate as it allows the subservice
  organization greater flexibility to identify and implement suitable controls for
  its environment than identifying multiple, narrowly defined controls such as
  the following:
           Passwords for in-scope systems are configured to require 8-character
           minimum and 90-day password changes.
           Management performs quarterly access reviews to ensure access is
           restricted appropriately.
      3.70 The following are additional examples of CSOCs related to logical
  access that service organization management may assume are in place at the
  subservice organization:

           • XYZ  Service Organization outsources the management of IT in-
             frastructure to a subservice organization. Using the service or-
               ganization's systems, subservice organization personnel manage
               access for the IT infrastructure components. Therefore, a CSOC
               should be included in the description and could be presented as
               follows:

                        The design of XYZ Service Organization's controls as-
                        sumes that the subservice organization has suitably de-
                        signed, implemented, operated, and monitored controls
                        that restrict access to authorized users identified at the
                        operating system and database layers.

           • XYZ Service Organization outsources the promotion of program
             changes to the production environment to a subservice organiza-
               tion. In this scenario, the service organization has granted priv-
               ileged access to the operating system and database layers to
               personnel from the subservice organization to facilitate the move-
               ment of program code into the production environment. Therefore,
               a CSOC should be included in the description and could be pre-
               sented as follows:

                        The design of XYZ Service Organization's controls as-
                        sumes that the subservice organization has suitably de-
                        signed, implemented, operated, and monitored a control
                        requiring periodic review of users with privileged access
                        at the operating system and database layers and requir-
                        ing notification of the service organization of necessary
                        changes in access.
       3.71 Because CSOCs are necessary, in combination with the service orga-
  nization's controls, to provide reasonable assurance that certain service com-
  mitments and system requirements are achieved based on the applicable trust
  services criteria, it is important that the description also include the subservice
  organization's responsibilities for implementing them and indicate that the ser-
  vice organization can only achieve the related service commitments and system
  requirements if the CSOCs are suitably designed and, in a type 2 examination,
  operating effectively throughout the period. The service auditor also considers
  CSOCs when evaluating the suitability of design of controls, as discussed be-
  ginning at paragraph 3.166.


AAG-SOP 3.70                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                        Performing the SOC 2 Examination                           111
Disclosures About Nonrelevant Criteria
     3.72 Description criterion DC8 requires the description to disclose any
specific applicable trust services criterion that is not relevant to the system
being described and the reasons it is not relevant. One way a trust services cri-
terion may not be relevant is if it does not apply to the system being examined.
For example, consider trust services criterion P2.1, which reads as follows: The
entity communicates choices available regarding the collection, use, retention,
disclosure, and disposal of personal information to the data subjects and the
consequences, if any, of each choice. Explicit consent for the collection, use, re-
tention, disclosure, and disposal of personal information is obtained from data
subjects or other authorized persons, if required. Such consent is obtained only
for the intended purpose of the information to meet the entity's objectives related
to privacy. The entity's basis for determining implicit consent for the collection,
use, retention, disclosure, and disposal of personal information is documented.)
When a user entity is responsible for providing individuals with choice and con-
sent, a service organization that only processes that information does not have
any obligations related to choice and consent. In that situation, the service or-
ganization would disclose that trust services criterion P2.1 is not relevant and
the reason why it is not relevant.
     3.73 If a criterion is relevant to the services provided, it is relevant even if
all components of the system used to provide the related aspect of the services
have been outsourced to a subservice organization. For example, a service orga-
nization utilizes an infrastructure-as-a-service cloud provider for all IT systems
related to the services provided. The subservice organization is responsible for
deleting information from its hosting environment before ending logical and
physical access of storage devices. Because the service organization still has
a contractual commitment to protect the information of its customers, CC 6.5,
The entity discontinues logical and physical protections over physical assets only
after the ability to read or recover data and software from those assets has been
diminished and is no longer required to meet the entity's objectives, is still rele-
vant, even if the subservice organization is carved out. In this situation, users
may find it helpful for management to reference the related CSOCs when pre-
senting the service organization's controls. Language such as the following may
be used:
         Controls related to this criterion are the responsibility of ABC sub-
         service organization and are described in the CSOCs presented in the
         description.

Disclosures About Signiﬁcant Changes to the System During
the Period Covered by a Type 2 Examination
    3.74 Description criterion DC9 requires that the description disclose the
relevant details of significant changes to the service organization's system dur-
ing the period that are relevant to the service organization's service commit-
ments and system requirements. Relevant changes are those that are likely
to be relevant to the system being examined (for example, the service orga-
nization's migration to a cloud infrastructure). In that case, disclosure of the
changes is likely to be important to report users.
    3.75 If the service auditor believes that the changes would be considered
significant by the broad range of report users, those changes would generally


©2022, AICPA                                                           AAG-SOP 3.75
112   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  be included in the description. The narrative discussing the change would be
  expected to contain an appropriate level of detail, including the date the change
  occurred and how the affected aspects of the system differed before and after
  the change.
      3.76 Examples of changes to a system that might be considered significant
  include the following:
          • Changes to the services provided
          • Changes to IT and security personnel
          • Changes   to system processes, IT architecture and applications,
            and the processes and system used by subservice organizations
          • Changes   to legal and regulatory requirements that could affect
            system requirements
          • Changes  to organizational structure resulting in a change to in-
            ternal control over the system (for example, a change to the legal
               entity)
          •    Implementation of new software and information security controls
      3.77 If the service organization has used the inclusive method, changes
  to be considered may exist at both the service organization and the subservice
  organization. Paragraph 4.79 presents an example of a separate paragraph that
  would be added to the service auditor's report when information about such
  changes is omitted from the description of the service organization's system.

  Changes to the System That Occur Between the Periods Covered
  by a Type 2 Examination
       3.78 In some cases, a type 2 report does not cover the period immediately
  following the period covered by the prior SOC 2 report, which results in a gap
  between the periods covered by the reports.
       3.79 If a significant change occurs during the gap period, service organiza-
  tion management may decide that the change is likely to be considered signifi-
  cant to report users. In that case, management may include a description of the
  change in the section of the type 2 report titled "Other Information Provided
  by the Service Organization." An example of such a change is a conversion to
  a new computer system or application during the gap period that results in
  (a) new or additional controls that are considered significant to report users
  and (b) controls over the conversion process that were not tested by the service
  auditor.

  Controls Remediated After the Period Covered by a Type 2
  Examination
       3.80 When a SOC 2 report identifies controls that are not operating effec-
  tively, management generally takes steps to remediate the control deficiencies.
  Management may wish to provide customers and business partners with infor-
  mation about the improvements made to their controls before the next SOC 2
  report is available. To enhance the trust and confidence that users can place
  in such information, management may engage the service auditor to perform
  procedures on such disclosures. The service auditor may be able to do so by
  performing such procedures as an agreed-upon procedures engagement under
  AT-C section 215, Agreed-Upon Procedures Engagement, or as part of an exam-
  ination under AT-C section 205.

AAG-SOP 3.76                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                         113
Evaluating Description Misstatements
     3.81 As discussed in paragraph 2.128, the term description misstatement
is used in this guide to describe differences between the description and the de-
scription criteria or omissions in the description. When considering whether a
description misstatement exists, the service auditor may consider the following:

        • The expectations the service auditor developed related to the na-
          ture and extent of disclosures that should be included in the de-
             scription of the system. Examples include the following:

                 —    Expectations may be developed based on the description
                      criteria. If a service organization uses the services of
                      a subservice organization, and the subservice organiza-
                      tion's controls are necessary, alone or in combination with
                      the service organization's controls, for the service organi-
                      zation to achieve its service commitments and system re-
                      quirements, the service auditor would expect to see a de-
                      scription of the subservice organization's controls when
                      the inclusive method is used. In addition, the service au-
                      ditor may have developed expectations about the nature
                      and extent of such disclosures based on the significance
                      (that is, the importance or the materiality) of the sub-
                      service organization's controls to the achievement of the
                      service organization's service commitments and system
                      requirements.
                 —    Expectations may be developed based on laws or regu-
                      lations. If a service organization is required by law to
                      comply with the European Union's General Data Protec-
                      tion Regulation (GDPR), the service auditor may expect
                      service organization management to describe compliance
                      with the GDPR as a principal service commitment in the
                      description. Furthermore, the service auditor may have
                      developed certain expectations about the nature and ex-
                      tent of disclosures that should be included in the de-
                      scription about the processes and controls to achieve that
                      commitment. Management's failure to describe a princi-
                      pal service commitment involving compliance with the
                      GDPR and the lack of related disclosures might be con-
                      sidered a misstatement.

        • Qualitative  factors that may affect the nature and extent of such
          disclosures. (See paragraph 3.86 for a more detailed discussion on
             qualitative factors.)
    3.82 The following are examples of description misstatements:

        • Inclusion of inappropriate information. For example, information
          that is not objectively measurable (such as unsubstantiated ad-
             vertising claims)
        •    Omission of necessary information. For example, omission of infor-
             mation about relevant subsequent events or changes to controls,
             relevant service commitments and system requirements, CUECs,
             or CSOCs

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 3.82
114   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

             • Changes   without reasonable justification. For example, revision
               of service commitments and system requirements during the en-
                   gagement without reasonable justification or changes from the
                   inclusive method to the carve-out method without reasonable
                   justification
             •     Misstatements of fact. For example, the inclusion of controls that
                   have not been implemented or service commitments and system
                   requirements that are incomplete

      3.83 When the service auditor identifies a material description misstate-
  ment, the service auditor ordinarily discusses the misstatement with service
  organization management. In many situations, service organization manage-
  ment would elect to revise the description to correct the misstatement.

       3.84 If the description is not revised, the service auditor would need to as-
  sess whether the identified description misstatement is material by considering
  whether there is a substantial likelihood that such misstatements or omissions
  in the description, individually or in the aggregate, would influence judgments
  made by users of the SOC 2 report. As an example, assume that a service organi-
  zation is required by law to comply with the GDPR. When reading the descrip-
  tion, however, the service auditor determines that service organization manage-
  ment has not disclosed a principal service commitment related to compliance
  with the GDPR. The service auditor determines that such information would
  influence the judgments made by SOC 2 report users; therefore, the service au-
  ditor concludes that omission of such information from the description results
  in a material misstatement. In that case, the service auditor would request that
  management amend the description by including the relevant information.5

      3.85 Paragraph .A19 of AT-C section 205 indicates that the service au-
  ditor should consider the concept of materiality in the context of qualitative
  factors (as discussed in the next paragraph) and quantitative factors (for ex-
  ample, when service organization management elects to disclose the percent-
  age of time that its internet-based systems were available during the period).
  Because the description criteria call for disclosure of primarily nonfinancial in-
  formation, most descriptions are presented in narrative form. Thus, the service
  auditor's materiality considerations are mainly qualitative in nature.

       3.86 When evaluating the materiality of a description misstatement, the
  following qualitative factors may be considered:

             • The  interaction between, and relative importance of, individual
               disclosures within the description.
             • The  wording used to make the required disclosures. For example,
               the wording chosen does not omit or distort the disclosures pre-
                   sented.
             •     Whether the characteristics of the presentation are appropriate,
                   given that the description criteria allow for variations in presen-
                   tation.


       5 If the description has been prepared to meet the informational needs of a specific subset of

  such SOC 2 report users (and the report is restricted to those specific users), management considers
  the possible effect of misstatements (including omissions) that may be relevant to that specific subset
  of report users.


AAG-SOP 3.83                                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                      Performing the SOC 2 Examination                          115
        • The extent to which identified deficiencies in the suitability of de-
          sign or the operating effectiveness of controls contradict the dis-
            closures about controls included in the description.
        •   The effect of the misstatement or potential misstatement on the
            description as a whole.
        •   The seriousness of the consequences of the misstatement to non-
            compliance with laws or regulations. As an example, assume a
            service organization claimed that its controls were effective to
            meet system requirements that support its compliance with cer-
            tain laws and regulations over privacy. However, the service au-
            ditor's tests indicated that such controls were not effective, and
            service organization management refused to revise the descrip-
            tion. When considering whether the misstatement is material, the
            service auditor may consider the consequences of the failure to
            comply with such laws and regulations, which could involve both
            loss of reputation and monetary fines, when concluding that the
            description misstatement is material.
        •   Whether the misstatement was intentional or unintentional.
        •   Whether the misstatement relates to the relationship between the
            responsible party and, if different, the engaging party or its rela-
            tionship with other parties.
     3.87 The following are some examples related to materiality with respect
to the description of the service organization's system:

        • Example  1. Example Service Organization uses a subservice orga-
          nization to perform its back-office functions; management elects
            to use the carve-out method. The description includes informa-
            tion about the nature of the services provided by the subservice
            organization and describes the monitoring and other controls per-
            formed at the service organization with respect to the processing
            performed by the subservice organization. However, it does not
            describe the types of controls that service organization manage-
            ment assumed, in the design of the service organization's system,
            would be implemented by the subservice organization and that
            are necessary, in combination with controls at the service organi-
            zation, to provide reasonable assurance that the service organiza-
            tion's service commitments and system requirements are achieved
            (CSOCs). Because the service auditor believes that understanding
            how the subservice organization's processes and controls may af-
            fect the achievement of the service organization's service commit-
            ment and system requirements is likely to be important to report
            users, the service auditor concludes that a description misstate-
            ment in such information would be material to the description of
            the service organization's system.
        •   Example 2. A service auditor is reporting on Example Service Or-
            ganization's security controls. The service organization mirrors
            data to a data center located in another city and creates tapes
            of the data as a secondary backup. These tapes are stored at a
            third location. Data written to the backup tapes is encrypted. The
            service organization has identified the encryption of the tapes as a
            control, but it has not identified physical security controls over the
            tape storage location as a control because management believes

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 3.87
116   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

               that the likelihood of destruction of both backups simultaneously
               is remote, and the encryption of the data on the tapes is sufficient.
               In this example, the omission of controls over physical access is
               not likely to be relevant to report users because controls over the
               encryption of the tapes prevent unauthorized access to the infor-
               mation and compensate for the omission of controls over physical
               access to the facility. Therefore, the omission of that information
               from the description would not be considered material.
           •   Example 3. A service auditor is reporting on controls related to se-
               curity, availability, and confidentiality of Example Service Organi-
               zation, which provides business users with a web-based customer
               relationship management system. The service auditor identifies
               certain deficiencies in the design of controls that protect customer
               data from unauthorized access. Because business users of the sys-
               tem are interested in maintaining the confidentiality of their cus-
               tomer relationships, the service auditor concluded that deficien-
               cies in such controls are likely to be considered significant to such
               users. Therefore, the omission of such deficiencies from the de-
               scription would be considered material.
           •   Example 4. Management of Example Service Organization makes
               certain claims within the description about the service organiza-
               tion's compliance with published privacy practices. Through ex-
               amination procedures, the service auditor identified the practice
               of sharing the email addresses of certain user entity customers
               with a related party for use when marketing the related party's
               products. Because the violation was both intentional and involved
               a related-party relationship, the service auditor concludes that the
               omission of the identified control deficiency is a material misstate-
               ment in the description.
      3.88 Once description misstatements have been identified, paragraph .46
  of AT-C section 205 states that the service auditor should accumulate descrip-
  tion misstatements identified during the engagement, other than those that
  are clearly trivial, to evaluate whether, individually or in the aggregate, those
  misstatements are material when forming the service auditor's opinion.
       3.89 The service auditor would generally also consider the potential effect
  on the description of identified deficiencies or deviations that relate to the suit-
  ability of the design or operating effectiveness of controls. If the service auditor
  determines that the effects of identified description misstatements, individu-
  ally or in the aggregate, are material with respect to the description, based
  on consideration of materiality as discussed beginning in paragraph 3.84, and
  therefore the subject matter is not in accordance with the criteria, the service
  auditor should modify the opinion on the description in accordance with para-
  graph .70 of AT-C section 205. When modifying the opinion, the service audi-
  tor's understanding of the nature and cause of the description misstatements
  and deficiencies enables the service auditor to determine how to appropriately
  modify the opinion. Chapter 4 discusses modifications of the service auditor's
  report.
       3.90 Paragraph .18 of AT-C section 205 indicates that the service auditor
  should reconsider materiality if the service auditor becomes aware of informa-
  tion during the engagement that would have caused the service auditor to have
  initially determined a different materiality.

AAG-SOP 3.88                                                        ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                         117
Obtaining Evidence About the Suitability of
the Design of Controls
     3.91 Suitably designed controls, if implemented and operating effectively,
provide reasonable assurance of achieving the service organization's service
commitments and system requirements based on the applicable trust services
criteria. Suitably designed controls operate as designed by persons who have
the necessary authority and competence to perform the controls. Service orga-
nization management is responsible for designing and implementing controls
to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commit-
ments and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust
services criteria, identifying the risks that threaten the achievement of the ser-
vice commitments and system requirements, modifying the controls as neces-
sary based on new and evolving risks, and evaluating the linkage between the
controls and the evolving risks and threats to the achievement of the service
commitments and system requirements.
    3.92 In accordance with paragraph .15 of AT-C section 205, the service au-
ditor's understanding of the controls within a system includes an evaluation of
the design of controls and whether the controls have been implemented. Eval-
uating the suitability of the design of controls involves assessing whether the
controls stated in the description adequately address the risks that threaten
the achievement of the service commitments and system requirements. This
assessment is a two-step process:

        • Obtaining   an understanding of and assessing the service orga-
          nization's risk assessment process to identify, design, and imple-
             ment effective controls
        •    Evaluating whether the controls identified, designed, and im-
             plemented by service organization management are suitably de-
             signed
    3.93 When evaluating service organization management's risk assess-
ment process, the service auditor ordinarily obtains an understanding of the
process through performance of the following:

        • Considering how service organization management
                  —   identifies the service organization's service commitments
                      and system requirements;
                  —   identifies information used by the system to provide the
                      service to user entities and business partners and deter-
                      mines the threats to the security of that information;
                  —   identifies the threats to the achievement of the service
                      organization's service commitments and system require-
                      ments and the vulnerabilities of the system components;
                  —   assesses the intersection of threats and vulnerabilities
                      (that is, realization of the risks) and evaluates the like-
                      lihood and potential magnitude of the realization of the
                      risks and the entity's tolerance for the identified risks;
                  —   incorporates information from its monitoring activities,
                      including new threats and exploits, system events, and
                      circumstances previously not considered; and

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 3.93
118   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                    — identifies whether a subservice organization has identi-
                      fied in its contract or in other communications with the
                      service organization any user entity responsibilities or
                      CUECs that should be in place at the service organiza-
                      tion, when the carve-out method is used

           • Evaluating evidence about the operating effectiveness of controls
             caused by a deficiency in the design of the controls
           • Evaluating  the frequency with which service organization man-
             agement updates the risk assessment and supporting processes
               and controls
           •   Considering whether service organization management uses an
               appropriate security framework for managing its system pro-
               cesses and controls (for example, the NIST CSF or International
               Organization for Standardization and International Electrotech-
               nical Commission [ISO/IEC] Standards 27001 and 27002) as part
               of its assessment and management process
           •   Considering whether management considers the risk of fraud,
               such as management override of identified controls, misappropri-
               ation of assets by service organization personnel, creation by ser-
               vice organization personnel of false or misleading documents or
               records, and inappropriate physical and logical access controls to
               information and the underlying infrastructure through social en-
               gineering attacks or similar measures
      3.94 Effective risk assessment is critical to the design of controls. Fail-
  ure to identify a significant threat or a vulnerability to a system component
  can cause the service organization to overlook a control that is necessary to
  achieve one or more service commitments and system requirements. In eval-
  uating the service organization's risk assessment process, the service auditor
  considers the completeness, accuracy, and timeliness of threat identification
  and the completeness and accuracy of vulnerability identification and manage-
  ment, including, if necessary, regularly monitoring external sources for new
  vulnerabilities.
      3.95 If the inclusive method is used to present the services and controls
  performed by a subservice organization, the service auditor also makes an as-
  sessment with respect to the controls at the subservice organization.
       3.96 If the service organization uses a subservice organization, and the
  controls of the subservice organization are carved out of the description, the ser-
  vice auditor determines whether the subservice organization has identified in
  its contract or in other communications with the service organization any user
  entity responsibilities or CUECs that should be implemented by the service or-
  ganization. If the subservice organization has identified such responsibilities
  or CUECs, the service auditor would ordinarily evaluate whether service or-
  ganization management has considered these responsibilities or CUECs in its
  risk assessment.
      3.97 When evaluating whether controls are suitably designed, the ser-
  vice auditor would generally evaluate the controls identified by management
  in comparison with the risks identified by management as part of it risk as-
  sessment process and the service auditor's own engagement risk assessment.
  The service auditor may also consider the following:


AAG-SOP 3.94                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                      Performing the SOC 2 Examination                        119
        a. The frequency or timing of the occurrence or performance of the
           control
        b. The authority and competence of the individual responsible for per-
           forming the control (for example, the level of the individual per-
           forming the control, the individual's role in the organization, and
           conflicting duties)
        c. The tasks within the control being performed and the precision and
           sensitivity of those tasks (for example, the results of reviews and
           related follow-up activities)
        d. Evidence that contradicts the assertion that the control is function-
           ing as designed, such as the rate of system incidents identified re-
           lated to the control
        e. Whether the control, when considered with other controls, ad-
           dresses each of the risks that threaten the achievement of the ser-
           vice commitments and system requirements based on the trust ser-
           vices criteria to which it relates
        f. Whether the applicable control or set of controls, if operated ef-
           fectively, would protect the information used by the system from
           system events that could compromise the achievement of the ser-
           vice organization's service commitments and system requirements
           based on the applicable trust services criteria
        g. Whether the information used in the operation of the controls is
           reliable (For example, the operation of a control may rely on config-
           uration parameters of the comparison of the data to another set of
           data that is expected to be complete and accurate.)
        h. Whether the applicable control or set of controls is adequately
           changing, adapting, and evolving, from a threat-monitoring per-
           spective, as new threats and exploits are identified and become able
           to be defended against
     3.98 Some controls at the service organization may involve sampling (for
example, reviewing a sample of data entered into the system as part of a qual-
ity assurance review or reviewing a sample of configuration settings for pro-
priety). When evaluating the design of a control that monitors the appropriate-
ness of system operations that uses sampling, the service auditor would need
to also consider the service organization's sampling methodology, including the
following:

        • Whether   sampling is an appropriate testing approach. (The con-
          siderations are similar to those that the service auditor would take
             into account when determining whether sampling is an appropri-
             ate strategy for testing controls as discussed in paragraph 3.157.)
        •    Whether management's assumptions, including the expected ac-
             curacy rate, are appropriate in the circumstances.
        •    Whether the control evaluates attributes of the system relative
             to the achievement of the service organization's service commit-
             ments and system requirements.
        •    Whether the sample size is sufficient to determine the accuracy
             rate within the population.
        •    Whether the sample of items is representative of the full popula-
             tion.

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 3.98
120   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          • Whether  a sufficient process is in place to review results and make
            corrective actions in a timely manner for errors identified and any
               instances where results fall below expected accuracy rates. For ex-
               ample, errors may be due to inaccuracies in attributes important
               to service organization management but not related to the ser-
               vice commitments and system requirements and, therefore, may
               be evaluated separately.
       3.99 The likelihood and magnitude of the realization of a risk will also
  affect the service auditor's judgment about the suitability of the design of con-
  trols and the appropriateness of management's risk assessment. For example,
  a service organization may permit just a user ID and password when authen-
  ticating access to an external informational website. The service auditor may
  assess the increased risk associated with single-factor authentication in this
  instance to be low and conclude that the control is suitably designed. However,
  if single-factor authentication were used for system administration account ac-
  cess, the service auditor would likely conclude that the authentication risk is a
  control deficiency that results in the failure to mitigate the risks.
       3.100 Factors such as the size and complexity of the service organization
  are also important considerations when evaluating the suitability of the design
  of controls. A smaller, less complex service organization may be able to address
  risks that threaten the achievement of its service commitments and system
  requirements by using a different set of controls than a larger, more complex
  service organization. For example, a smaller, less complex service organization
  may
          • have controls, including policies and procedures, that are less for-
            mal and detailed but sufficient to address the assessed risks;
          • have fewer levels of management, which may result in more direct
            oversight of the operation of key controls; and
          • make greater use of manual controls versus automated controls.
       3.101 In addition, a small, less complex organization may have different
  policies and procedures for structuring its board of directors than a larger, more
  complex organization. Although the latter may have policies and procedures
  that require the board members be independent from management and to ex-
  ercise oversight over the development and performance of internal control, a
  less complex service organization may find it costly and unnecessary to attract
  independent board members. In those organizations, the responsibility for over-
  seeing the strategic direction of the service organization and the obligations
  related to the accountability of the service organization may be held by various
  parties, including the owner of a small business. If the oversight of an owner-
  manager is adequate to mitigate risks arising from the lack of segregation of
  duties that often exists in smaller, less complex service organizations, the ser-
  vice organization's policies and procedures may be appropriate to address the
  assessed risk even without an independent board of directors. On the other
  hand, if the owner-manager does not have the knowledge or competence to ef-
  fectively perform the oversight role, the lack of independent oversight by board
  members may cause a breakdown in internal controls and increase the risk of
  fraud. In such cases, the lack of policies and procedures requiring independent
  board members to perform the oversight role may be considered a deficiency in
  the design of controls.


AAG-SOP 3.99                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                         121
Additional Considerations for Subservice Organizations
     3.102 Identifying and assessing risks and addressing such risks through
effective internal control is one of the critical roles of management. When a ser-
vice organization outsources tasks or functions to a subservice organization, it
shifts some of the risks associated with performing those tasks or functions in-
ternally to risks associated with outsourcing. Even when a task or function is
outsourced, service organization management retains the ultimate responsibil-
ity for managing these risks. That is why service organizations need to monitor
the services provided by the subservice organization.
     3.103 Because service organization management is responsible for mon-
itoring the suitability of design and operating effectiveness of controls at a
subservice organization, the description needs to disclose the processes and
controls the service organization uses to monitor the services provided by the
subservice organization. Controls that a service organization may implement
to monitor the services provided and controls performed by a subservice orga-
nization are discussed further beginning at paragraph 3.67. In addition, con-
siderations when evaluating the suitability of design and the operating effec-
tiveness of controls used to monitor the controls at the subservice organization
are discussed beginning at paragraph 3.168.
    3.104 As part of its monitoring activities, service organization manage-
ment may obtain a copy of a type 1 or type 2 report from the subservice or-
ganization if one is available. If the subservice organization's type 1 or type 2
report identifies the need for CUECs at the service organization, the descrip-
tion should describe the processes and controls the service organization has
implemented to address the CUECs identified in the subservice organization's
description of its system. In addition to describing the services provided by the
subservice organization, management may indicate in its description whether
the subservice organization's report is a type 1 or type 2 report.
     3.105 As an example, assume that a service organization outsources as-
pects of its technology infrastructure to a subservice organization. The subser-
vice organization's description includes the following CUEC:
         User entities should have controls in place to restrict access to system
         resources to appropriate user entity personnel.
     3.106 To address the CUEC included in the subservice organization's de-
scription, service organization management would include controls such as the
following in its description of the service organization's system:

        • Access  control software and rule sets are used to restrict logical ac-
          cess to information assets, including hardware, data (at rest, dur-
             ing processing, or in transmission), software, administrative au-
             thorities, mobile devices, output, and offline system components.
        •    Persons, infrastructure, and software are identified and authen-
             ticated prior to accessing information assets, whether locally or
             remotely.
        •    Combinations of data classification, separate data structures, port
             restrictions, access protocol restrictions, user identification, and
             digital certificates are used to establish access control rules for
             information assets.


©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 3.106
122   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

             • Identification and authentication requirements are established,
               documented, and managed for individuals and systems accessing
                  entity information, infrastructure, and software.

  Multiple Controls Are Necessary to Address All Aspects of an
  Applicable Trust Services Criterion
       3.107 The service organization may have multiple controls in place to
  address the risks that threaten the achievement of the service organization's
  service commitments and system requirements based on the applicable trust
  services criteria. In this case, the service auditor may need to consider the
  suitability of each of those controls when determining whether controls have
  been suitably designed to address each of the risks associated with a particu-
  lar criterion.6 For example, trust services criterion A1.2, The entity authorizes,
  designs, develops or acquires, implements, operates, approves, maintains, and
  monitors environmental protections, software, data backup processes, and re-
  covery infrastructure to meet its objectives, addresses, among other things, the
  risk that a server will not be able to support system availability in the event
  of a distributed denial-of-service attack. The service organization can address
  one aspect of this risk (and thus one element of that criterion) by designing
  and implementing a control that provides redundant load-balanced infrastruc-
  ture protected by mechanisms for detecting and dropping access attempts. In
  this situation, when evaluating suitability of design, the service auditor would
  also have to consider other controls the service organization has designed and
  implemented to achieve the other aspects of that criterion.
       3.108 The service auditor may conclude that there are no controls in place
  to support one or more aspects of an applicable trust services criterion. For ex-
  ample, for the trust services criterion PI1.2, The entity implements policies and
  procedures over system inputs, including controls over completeness and accu-
  racy, to result in products, services, and reporting to meet the entity's objectives,
  user entities may submit transaction processing requests by telephone or elec-
  tronically. Although the service organization has identified in its description
  controls that address the processing of electronic transaction requests received
  from user entities, it has not identified controls that address transaction re-
  quests received via telephone. In this situation, the service auditor would gen-
  erally conclude that controls were not suitably designed to process transaction
  requests received via telephone.

  Multiple Controls to Address a Particular Assessed Risk
      3.109 The service organization may have designed and implemented
  multiple (redundant) controls to address a particular risk that threatens the
  achievement of its service commitments and system requirements. If the ser-
  vice auditor evaluated the suitability of design of one control and determined
  that it was ineffective, the service auditor may consider whether one or more of
  the other controls was suitably designed to address the risk. That control may
  then be tested to obtain evidence about operating effectiveness. In addition, the
  service auditor would ordinarily ask management to revise the description to


       6 TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity,

  Confidentiality, and Privacy (With Revised Points of Focus — 2022), presents the 2017 trust services
  criteria. The trust services criteria are used by service organization management and by the service
  auditor when evaluating whether the service organization's service commitments and system require-
  ments were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.


AAG-SOP 3.107                                                                     ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                          123
exclude the control that is not suitably designed and include the control or con-
trols that are suitably designed based on the applicable trust services criterion.

Procedures to Obtain Evidence About the Suitability of
Design of Controls
    3.110 The service auditor evaluates the suitability of the design of controls
by using evidence and other information gathered when

         • obtaining an understanding of the service organization's system
           and the controls within that program and
         • determining  whether the description of the system presents the
           system that was designed and implemented in accordance with
             the description criteria (including evidence obtained from per-
             forming walk-throughs).
    3.111 To supplement such evidence and other information, the service au-
ditor generally performs a combination of the following procedures:

         • Inquiry of service organization personnel about the design and
           operation of applicable controls and the types of system events
             that have occurred or that may occur
         •   Inspection of documents produced by the service organization
         •   Performing additional walk-throughs of control-activity-related
             policies and procedures
         •   Reading applicable and supporting system documentation
         •   Determining whether attacks and vulnerability exploitations, in-
             cluding those identified publicly by organizations such as the
             United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team, and emerg-
             ing risks and threats have been adequately addressed
     3.112 As discussed beginning in paragraph 2.63, service organization
management may document controls in a variety of ways. The nature and ex-
tent of documentation usually varies, depending on the size and complexity of
the service organization and its monitoring activities. In some cases, the ser-
vice auditor may be able to obtain and inspect management's documentation
of controls, including its identification of risks and evaluation of the linkage of
controls to those risks. In that case, the service auditor may use the documenta-
tion as a starting point when evaluating the completeness, accuracy, relevance,
and timeliness of management's risk assessment process and the suitability of
design of the controls implemented to mitigate those risks.

Additional Considerations When the Carve-Out Method Is Used for a
Subservice Organization
     3.113 If the service organization uses the carve-out method for a subser-
vice organization, the service auditor would also need to evaluate whether the
types of controls expected to be implemented at the subservice organization
would, if operating effectively in combination with the controls at the service
organization, provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's ser-
vice commitments and system requirements were achieved. The service auditor
would also need to consider whether evidence exists that the service organi-
zation has communicated to the subservice organization the service organiza-
tion's requirements with respect to the types of controls that are expected to
be implemented and whether there is any evidence that deficiencies exist in

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 3.113
124   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  either the suitability of the design or, in a type 2 examination, the operating
  effectiveness of controls at the subservice organization.
      3.114 Examples of procedures that may be performed to obtain such evi-
  dence include the following:

          • Reading contracts and other communications with the subservice
            organization to determine whether they identify the types of con-
               trols expected to be implemented at the subservice organization
          •    Obtaining an understanding of the procedures in place at the ser-
               vice organization to evaluate and monitor the implementation,
               suitability of design, and in a type 2 examination, the operating
               effectiveness of the controls at the subservice organization (for ex-
               ample, evaluation of a service auditor's SOC 2 report on the sub-
               service organization's system or testing performed at the subser-
               vice organization by service organization personnel)
          •    Obtaining and evaluating a SOC 2 report on the subservice orga-
               nization's system. For example, if the service organization is re-
               sponsible for developing, testing, and approving program changes
               but has outsourced the actual implementation of the changes to
               the subservice organization, the service auditor would conclude
               that controls at the subservice organization are necessary based
               on trust services criterion CC8.1, The entity authorizes, designs,
               develops or acquires, configures, documents, tests, approves, and
               implements changes to infrastructure, data, software, and proce-
               dures to meet its objectives.

  Evaluating Deﬁciencies in the Suitability of Design of Controls
       3.115 A deficiency in the design of a control occurs when a risk that threat-
  ens the achievement of one or more of the service organization's service com-
  mitments and system requirements is not sufficiently mitigated by one or more
  properly designed controls. In contrast, a deficiency in the operation of a con-
  trol exists when a properly designed control does not operate as designed. A
  service organization may be able to correct a deficiency in the operation of a
  control, for example, by providing additional training to the employee who per-
  forms the control. However, if the design of the control is deficient, the control
  will not operate effectively regardless of who performs it. For that reason, the
  service auditor often would not test the operating effectiveness of a control that
  is not suitably designed. Instead, the service auditor generally would evaluate
  the design of other controls, if any, that address the same risks.
      3.116 In some situations, two or more controls are suitably designed only
  when operating in conjunction with each other. In these situations, the service
  auditor evaluates the suitability of design and operating effectiveness of the
  controls together in order to reach a conclusion.
       3.117 When identifying such deficiencies, the service auditor considers
  whether the controls have the ability, as designed, to provide reasonable as-
  surance that the service organization achieved its service commitments and
  system requirements based on the applicable trust services criteria if they op-
  erate effectively. The service auditor may also consider the potential effect of
  other factors that may affect the opinion on the suitability of the design of
  controls, such as description misstatements or deficiencies in the operating
  effectiveness of controls. Generally, if controls are not suitably designed and

AAG-SOP 3.114                                                     ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                        125
implemented to provide reasonable assurance that one or more service com-
mitments or system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust
services criteria, such deficiencies are considered material. Materiality consid-
erations when evaluating the suitability of design of controls are discussed be-
ginning in paragraph 3.187.

    3.118 Once deficiencies in the design of controls have been identified, the
service auditor should, in accordance with paragraph .46 of AT-C section 205,
accumulate deficiencies identified during the engagement, other than those
that are clearly trivial, to evaluate whether, individually or in the aggregate,
those deficiencies are material when forming the service auditor's opinion.

    3.119 Paragraphs 4.87–.89 present examples of separate paragraphs that
would be added to the service auditor's report when the service auditor deter-
mines that controls are not suitably designed to provide reasonable assurance
that one or more of the service organization's service commitments or system
requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.


Obtaining Evidence About the Operating Effectiveness of
Controls in a Type 2 Examination
    3.120 Suitably designed controls operate as designed by persons who have
the necessary authority and competence to perform the controls. Controls that
operate effectively provide reasonable assurance of achieving the service orga-
nization's service commitments and system requirements based on the appli-
cable trust services criteria.

    3.121 In a type 2 examination, the service auditor tests the operating effec-
tiveness of the controls stated in the description. The service auditor performs
procedures (commonly referred to as tests of controls) to obtain evidence about
the operating effectiveness of controls. Evidence from tests of controls usually
relates to how the controls were applied, the consistency with which they were
applied, and by whom or in what manner they were applied. When a service
organization uses the inclusive method to present the services and controls of
a subservice organization, the service auditor also applies tests of controls to
the controls at the subservice organization.

    3.122 If the service auditor has identified design deficiencies, the service
auditor generally would not test the operating effectiveness of those controls.
However, in certain circumstances, report users may expect management to
identify the control in the description and may expect the service auditor to
perform tests of the control. In such situations, the service auditor may choose
to perform such testing and include the results of the testing in the report.

Designing and Performing Tests of Controls
    3.123 In accordance with paragraph .25 of AT-C section 205, the service
auditor should design and perform tests of controls to obtain sufficient appro-
priate audit evidence about the effectiveness of controls stated in the descrip-
tion. By including those controls in the description, service organization man-
agement has identified them as part of the system the service organization
has designed, implemented, and operated to provide reasonable assurance that
the service organization's service commitments and system requirements were
achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.

©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP 3.123
126   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

       3.124 The service auditor is responsible for determining the nature (how
  the controls are tested), timing (when the controls are tested and the frequency
  of the testing), and extent (the number of procedures performed or the size of
  the sample) of procedures necessary to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence
  about the operating effectiveness of controls throughout the period addressed
  by the examination.
       3.125 The service organization's control environment, risk assessment, in-
  formation and communications, and monitoring components may also affect the
  system used to provide services to user entities and business partners. Controls
  within each of those components may enhance the effectiveness of specific con-
  trols or mitigate deficiencies in other controls. When not operating effectively,
  controls within each of those components may also have a detrimental effect on
  the operation of other controls. If the service auditor determines that certain
  controls with the control environment or other components are not effective, the
  service auditor would generally design and perform further procedures whose
  nature, timing, and extent are based on, and responsive to, the assessed risks
  of material misstatement resulting from those controls that are not operating
  effectively. In some situations, the service auditor may conclude that controls
  are not operating effectively because of deficiencies in controls related to one or
  more of the components of internal control.
      3.126 As the risk addressed by a control being tested increases, the suffi-
  ciency and appropriateness of evidence that the service auditor needs to sup-
  port an opinion on control effectiveness also increases. Factors the service au-
  ditor may consider when determining nature, timing, and extent of tests of
  controls include the following:

           • The   nature and materiality of misstatements that the control is
             intended to prevent, or detect and correct
           • Whether the control has a history of operating deficiencies
           • The   effectiveness of monitoring activities over that and other
             controls
           • The nature of the control and the frequency with which it operates
           • The  degree to which other controls are dependent on the effective-
             ness of the control
           • The  competence of the personnel who perform the control or mon-
             itor its performance and whether there have been changes in key
               personnel who perform the control or monitor its performance
           •   Whether the control is manual (that is, relies on performance by
               an individual) or automated
           •   The complexity of the control and the significance of the judg-
               ments that would be made in connection with its operation
      3.127 Generally, a conclusion that a control is not operating effectively can
  be supported by less evidence than is necessary to support a conclusion that a
  control is operating effectively.


  Nature of Tests of Controls
       3.128 The nature and objectives of tests to evaluate the operating effec-
  tiveness of controls are different from those performed to evaluate the suitabil-
  ity of the design of controls. When designing and performing tests of controls,

AAG-SOP 3.124                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                         127
the service auditor would generally perform one or more of the following pro-
cedures:
        a. Inquire of service organization personnel, perform inspection (for
           example, of documents, reports, or electronic files) and other proce-
           dures, observe the application of the control, or reperform the con-
           trol to obtain evidence about the following:
                  i. How the control was executed (Was the control performed
                     as designed?)
                 ii. The consistency with which the control was applied
                     throughout the period
                iii. By whom or by what means the control was applied (Is
                     the control automated or manual? Has there been high
                     turnover of the personnel in the position that performs the
                     control, and is the control being performed by an inexperi-
                     enced person?)
        b. Determine whether the controls to be tested depend on the operat-
           ing effectiveness of other controls and, if so, whether it is necessary
           to obtain evidence supporting the operating effectiveness of those
           controls.
        c. Evaluate whether the information produced by the service organi-
           zation is reliable when such information is integral to the perfor-
           mance of the control (as discussed beginning at paragraph 3.138).
        d. Determine an effective method for selecting the items to be tested
           to meet the objectives of the tests of controls.
     3.129 Inquiry alone does not provide sufficient appropriate evidence of
the operating effectiveness of controls. Performing inquiry combined with in-
spection or reperformance ordinarily provides more convincing evidence than
performing inquiry and observation. For example, a service auditor may inquire
about and observe a service organization's physical building security during the
initial walk-throughs. Because an observation is pertinent only at the point in
time at which it is made, the service auditor would generally supplement the
observation with other procedures to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence re-
garding the operating effectiveness of the physical security control throughout
the period. For example, the service auditor may inspect the video tapes that
monitor the entrance of the facility and select a sample of individuals who en-
tered the building to determine whether their names were included on the list
of authorized individuals during that period.
    3.130 Because of the methods used to store and transmit data within the
system, the service auditor may find the use of analytics to be a highly effective
technique when performing tests of controls. The following procedures illus-
trate ways in which analytics may be used when evaluating the suitability of
design and operating effectiveness of controls:

        • Documentation  of authorization of service organization manage-
          ment approvals may be stored in an online workflow system, per-
             mitting the records from the system to be extracted and analyzed.
        •    System logs may be scanned for unusual activity that may be
             indicative of failure in the design or operating effectiveness of
             controls.

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 3.130
128   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

           • Server security configuration parameters may be scanned and an-
             alyzed for consistency with policy.
           • Access
             rules.
                    control lists can be analyzed for appropriateness of access


  When using analytics, the service auditor would need to perform procedures to
  validate the completeness and accuracy of the information received from the
  entity, as discussed beginning in paragraph 3.138.

       3.131 The type of control being tested may affect the nature, timing, and
  extent of the testing performed by the service auditor. Some controls provide
  more persuasive evidence of their operating effectiveness than others. For ex-
  ample, some controls may leave a document trail when they operate. The ser-
  vice auditor may inspect such documentation to obtain evidence about the op-
  erating effectiveness of those controls. Other controls, however, may not leave
  documented evidence of their operation; for those controls, the service auditor
  may need to plan to test those controls when they operate.

       3.132 If control documentation has been lost, misplaced, or inadvertently
  deleted by the service organization, the service auditor may have to evaluate
  the types of evidence available and whether the operating effectiveness of the
  control can be tested through other procedures, such as observation, that would
  provide evidence of operating effectiveness throughout the period. However, de-
  pending on the controls being tested and their significance to the achievement
  of the service organization's service commitments and system requirements,
  observation alone may not provide sufficient appropriate evidence of operating
  effectiveness. If the service auditor is unable to obtain sufficient appropriate ev-
  idence in support of the operating effectiveness of such controls, the opinion on
  operating effectiveness should be modified (for a scope limitation) in accordance
  with paragraph .70 of AT-C section 205 if the possible effect of the matter is or
  may be material. In some circumstances, when determining whether a quali-
  fied opinion or disclaimer of opinion would be appropriate, the service auditor
  may consider qualitative factors such as whether the absence of sufficient ap-
  propriate evidence was a result of the failure of a control to operate effectively
  or the inadvertent destruction of evidence (for example, the destruction of the
  computer hard disk on which the evidence was stored).

       3.133 In addition to performing procedures to directly test the operating
  effectiveness of a control, the service auditor may also perform procedures to
  indirectly obtain evidence about whether a control operated to prevent or de-
  tect errors and fraud. For example, when testing the operating effectiveness
  of vulnerability scanning controls, the service auditor may use the service au-
  ditor's firm's own vulnerability scanning tools to detect unidentified vulnera-
  bilities in the service organization's system. By comparing the results of the
  service auditor's independent vulnerability scan to the results of the service or-
  ganization's vulnerability scan, the service auditor obtains evidence about the
  effectiveness of such controls. As another example, the service auditor might ob-
  tain from management a listing of system incidents identified throughout the
  period and compare the vulnerabilities exploited to the controls implemented
  by the service organization. Identifying deficiencies in the design or operation
  of the controls implemented to address exploited vulnerabilities can assist the
  service auditor with the evaluation of the suitability of design and operating
  effectiveness of such controls.

AAG-SOP 3.131                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                        129
     3.134 If there have been significant changes made to the service organi-
zation's system during the examination period, and the superseded controls
are relevant to the achievement of one or more service commitments or system
requirements, the service auditor should, in accordance with paragraph .20 of
AT-C section 205, obtain sufficient appropriate evidence regarding the suitabil-
ity of design and operating effectiveness of both the superseded controls and the
new controls to draw conclusions regarding the suitability of design and operat-
ing effectiveness of controls. In accordance with paragraph .48 of AT-C section
205, if the service auditor is unable to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence
to conclude that the controls operated effectively to provide reasonable assur-
ance that the service commitments and system requirements were achieved
throughout the period, the service auditor should apply the requirements of
paragraphs .70–.86 of AT-C section 205 to determine the appropriate opinion
to be issued or withdraw from the engagement.

Testing Review Controls
    3.135 When designing tests of controls to evaluate the design of review
controls, the service auditor needs to understand the following matters:

        • How   the control was performed, including the specific steps in-
          volved in executing the review
        • What the control owner considered when performing the review
        • The  criteria or thresholds used to trigger further investigation or
          other follow-up actions
        • The  steps involved in investigating and resolving matters identi-
          fied by the reviewer
     3.136 When testing the effectiveness of review controls, the service audi-
tor also needs to consider the precision with which the control needed to be per-
formed to determine whether the control operated the same way each time. The
service auditor may need to determine whether the evidence gathered through
the tests performed demonstrates that the review control consistently identi-
fied appropriate items for follow-up and that matters identified for investiga-
tion were resolved in a timely manner. Without documented instances of the
review control identifying appropriate items for follow-up, the service auditor
may not have sufficient appropriate evidence that the review control operated
as designed throughout the examination period. The service auditor may find
it necessary to test review controls through reperformance of the control in ad-
dition to inspection of the control.

Evaluating the Reliability of Information Produced by the Service
Organization or Management’s Specialists
    3.137 From the service auditor's perspective, there are three types of in-
formation produced by a service organization:

        • Information provided to the service auditor in response to ad hoc
          requests from the service auditor (for example, a request for a pop-
             ulation list, such as a population of application changes that the
             service auditor uses to select a sample of items for testing)
        •    Information used in the execution of a control (for example, a user
             access list used by service organization personnel in an access re-
             view control or a list of controls that did not operate during the
             examination period)

©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP 3.137
130   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

           • Information  prepared for user entities (for example, a report list-
             ing user entity employee access)
       3.138 When using information produced by the service organization, in
  accordance with paragraph .36 of AT-C section 205, the service auditor should
  evaluate whether the information is sufficiently reliable for the service audi-
  tor's purposes, including, as necessary, the following:
          a. Obtaining evidence about the accuracy and completeness of the in-
             formation
          b. Evaluating whether the information is sufficiently precise and de-
             tailed for the service auditor's purposes
      3.139 A service organization may prepare information to be used in the
  execution of a control only once or on a recurring basis. The information may be
  created manually or generated from a system. Information may also be made
  available to users through a data warehouse, which permits user entities to
  generate their own reports. Each of these factors may affect the procedures the
  service auditor performs to evaluate the reliability of information to be used in
  the examination.
       3.140 In most cases, the service auditor identifies the information pro-
  duced by the service organization while performing procedures to obtain the
  understanding of the service organization's system and controls within the
  system as discussed beginning at paragraph 3.93. Questions a service auditor
  may ask about information produced by the service organization include the
  following:

           • How  is the information produced or generated? (For example, the
             service organization's applications or systems, other service orga-
               nization sources such as manually produced reports, or vendors
               outside the service organization)
           •   What procedures were performed to determine whether informa-
               tion produced or generated by applications or tools developed by
               third parties is accurate and complete?
           •   How is the information used?
           •   What effect could the information have on user entities?
           •   Is the information located in a controlled IT environment or an ad
               hoc reporting database or data warehouse?
           •   Is the information highly structured and complex or relatively
               straightforward?
           •   Does the information originate from a system already subject to
               the service auditor's procedures or from a system beyond the scope
               of the service auditor's examination?
           •   What is the basis for the service organization's comfort with the
               reliability of the information?
           •   Were any classes or ranges of data excluded from the information
               provided by the service organization? If so, were those exclusions
               appropriate?
       3.141 In addition to these matters, the service auditor would ordinarily
  assess the impact such information could have on the examination. The results
  of the service auditor's tests will not be reliable if the population from which the
  items have been selected for testing is incomplete or inaccurate. For example,

AAG-SOP 3.138                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                         131
the results of tests over the effectiveness of a review of user access controls
may be affected by the completeness and accuracy of the information used to
prepare the user access reports. In this case, the service auditor may decide to
inspect the scripts used to create the user access reports for accuracy of logic
before performing the procedures.
    3.142 Depending on the means by which the service auditor obtains the
information, the service auditor develops a plan to assess the completeness and
accuracy of such information. The following factors may be relevant when as-
sessing the information used in the execution of controls:
        •    The importance of the control in mitigating risks that threaten the
             achievement of the service organization's service commitments
             and system requirements
        •    The risk that one or more service commitments or system require-
             ments would not be achieved if the information produced by the
             service organization is not reliable
        •    The degree to which the effectiveness of the control depends on
             the completeness and accuracy of the information
        •    The degree to which the control depends on other controls
        •    The precision with which the control is performed (for example,
             precision of review controls)
     3.143 Determining the nature and extent of evidence needed to assess
the reliability of information produced by the service organization is a mat-
ter of professional judgment. The service auditor may obtain evidence about
the reliability of such information when testing controls or may develop and
perform specific procedures that address this information. For example, when
information is produced by a software application or tool, the service auditor
may consider obtaining either a SOC 2 report on processing integrity for that
application or tool or a SOC for Supply Chain report on the processing integrity
of the process used in developing the application or tool. Paragraph .23 of AT-C
section 205 notes that the more important the information or the control, the
more persuasive the evidence about the reliability of the information should
be. Because a type 2 report covers a period of time, the reliability of the infor-
mation produced by the service organization needs to be evaluated throughout
the examination period.
    3.144 Generally, testing only the IT general controls supporting the sys-
tem is not a sufficient procedure to evaluate the reliability of information pro-
duced by the service organization. The following are examples of additional
procedures the service auditor may perform when evaluating the reliability of
various types of information produced by the service organization:
         Example 1: Information provided by the service organization to the ser-
         vice auditor in response to an ad hoc request from the service auditor
         The service organization provides the service auditor with a system-
         generated list of new accounts set up during the period. In evaluating
         the accuracy and completeness of the list of new accounts set up during
         the period, the service auditor may do the following:
                  a. Observe the generation of the list of new accounts set
                      up during the period, confirm that the correct source was
                      queried and that the date range and type of account pa-
                      rameters were accurately entered, and determine whether
                      any exclusions are listed.

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 3.144
132   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                    b. Inspect the list for any new accounts with a "created on"
                        date that is outside the date range specified.
                    c. Test the IT general controls supporting the system.
           Example 2: Information used in the execution of a control
           The description of the service organization's system states that a list
           of terminated employees is automatically produced by the human re-
           sources management system (HRMS) application on a weekly basis
           and that access to supporting business applications by terminated em-
           ployees is removed on the date of termination. In evaluating the accu-
           racy and completeness of the termination report, the service auditor
           may do the following:
                    a. Observe the human resources manager enter the date
                        range and termination parameter into the reporting tool
                        within the production environment of the HRMS applica-
                        tion.
                    b. Inspect the report for any termination dates outside the
                        date range specified.
                    c. Test the IT general controls supporting the HRMS.
           Example 3: Population of incidents
           The incident management recordkeeping application generates a re-
           port of all incidents during a period. Before testing a sample of such
           incidents, the service auditor may inspect the query logic used to gen-
           erate the report and perform a walk-through of the process used to
           record incidents in the application. The service auditor may also in-
           spect the report for anomalous gaps in sequence or timing to determine
           completeness.
           Example 4: Population of changes
           The change management system is used to communicate changes
           ready for implementation. Before testing a sample of changes to ap-
           plication software, the service auditor may perform a walk-through of
           the process used to communicate changes ready for implementation
           in order to understand whether any alternate paths of communica-
           tion exist. The service auditor would also assess the completeness of
           the population as well as the segregation of duties between those re-
           sponsible for the development and testing of the changes and those
           responsible for migration of changes to the production environment.
           The service auditor would also consider the enforcement of the segre-
           gation of duties through logical access controls.
           Example 5: Population of servers
           All servers accessed by the system are included in vulnerability scans.
           Before testing the results of a sample of vulnerability scans, the service
           auditor would ascertain the process for performing the vulnerability
           scans (for example, subnet scanning, manually adding server names)
           and the configurations used to include the service organization's sys-
           tem. The service auditor would need to understand and consider how
           the server build-out process is conducted and how servers are migrated
           to the relevant environments to be included in the scanning.
      3.145 As discussed beginning in paragraph 2.11, there may be situations
  in which management engages a management's specialist to leverage knowl-
  edge, technologies, experience, and expertise not resident within the service

AAG-SOP 3.145                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                        Performing the SOC 2 Examination                         133
organization. In some situations, service organization management engages a
management's specialist to provide information about the operation of controls
that will assist management in enhancing the effectiveness of the service orga-
nization's controls. In this situation, in addition to performing the procedures
described in paragraph 3.144, the service auditor may also perform the follow-
ing procedures to determine if such information is sufficiently reliable for the
service auditor's purposes:

        • Evaluating
          specialist
                     the competence, capabilities, and objectivity of the

        • Obtaining an understanding of the work of the specialist
        • Evaluating the appropriateness of that specialist's work as ev-
          idence regarding the operation of the service organization's
             controls


Timing of Tests of Controls
   3.146 The following factors may be relevant to the service auditor's deter-
mination of the timing of tests of controls:

        • The period of time during which the information will be available.
          For example,
                  —     electronic files may be overwritten after a period of time,
                  —     procedures may occur only at certain times during the
                        period, and
                  —     certain procedures may need to be performed after the
                        end of the period, such as reviewing reconciliations that
                        are generated after the end of the period

        • Whether  the control leaves evidence of its operation and, if not,
          whether the control can be tested through observation of the per-
             formance of the control.
        •    The significance of the control being tested to the achievement
             of the service organization's service commitments and system re-
             quirements based on the applicable trust services criteria.
     3.147 The service auditor may perform tests of controls at interim dates,
at the end of the examination period, or after the examination period if the tests
relate to controls that were in operation during the period but do not leave ev-
idence until after the end of the period. Performing procedures at an interim
date may assist the service auditor in identifying, at an early stage of the ex-
amination, any potential deficiencies in the design or the operating effective-
ness of controls and, consequently, provide an opportunity for the service orga-
nization to resolve identified deficiencies prior to the end of the examination
period, regardless of the service auditor's determination about whether they
affect the service auditor's report. When the service auditor performs tests of
the operating effectiveness of controls during an interim period, the service au-
ditor should, in accordance with paragraph .47 of AT-C section 205, evaluate
whether sufficient appropriate evidence has been obtained regarding the op-
erating effectiveness of the controls throughout the period, and if necessary,
obtain further evidence. Such further evidence may be obtained by performing
inquiries, inspecting the results of monitoring activities, and performing addi-
tional testing for the remaining period.

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 3.147
134   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

      3.148 Paragraph 4.87 contains an illustrative paragraph that would be
  added to the service auditor's report if controls were not suitably designed to
  provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commit-
  ments and system requirements were achieved based on an applicable trust
  services criterion for a portion of the period under examination.

  Extent of Tests of Controls
       3.149 The extent of the service auditor's testing refers to the size of the
  sample tested or the number of observations of a control activity. The extent of
  testing is based on the service auditor's professional judgment after considering
  factors such as the following:
           • The tolerable rate of deviation
           • The expected rate of deviation
           • The frequency with which the control operates
           • The relevance and reliability of the evidence that can be obtained
             to support the conclusion that the controls are operating effec-
               tively
           •   The length of the testing period
           •   The significance of the control to the achievement of the service or-
               ganization's service commitments and system requirements based
               on the applicable trust services criteria
           •   The extent to which audit evidence is obtained from tests of other
               controls that support the achievement of those service commit-
               ments and system requirements based on the applicable trust ser-
               vices criteria.
       3.150 The service auditor expresses an opinion on the operating effec-
  tiveness of controls throughout the period covered by the examination; conse-
  quently, in accordance with paragraph .47 of AT-C section 205, the sufficiency of
  the evidence regarding the effectiveness of controls should support that opinion.
  For example, if a control operates daily, the service auditor would test the oper-
  ation of the control for a sufficient number of days throughout the period cov-
  ered by the examination to determine whether the control operated effectively
  throughout the entire period. The shorter the period over which the control is
  performed, the less likely the service auditor will be able to obtain sufficient
  appropriate evidence to express an opinion on the effectiveness of controls. For
  example, if a control operates only once annually, and that date is outside of the
  examination period, the service auditor would be unable to test the operating
  effectiveness of the control within the period.
       3.151 Evidence about the satisfactory operation of controls in prior periods
  does not provide evidence of the operating effectiveness of controls during the
  current period. The service auditor expresses an opinion on the effectiveness
  of controls throughout each period; therefore, sufficient appropriate evidence
  about the operating effectiveness of controls throughout the current period is
  required for the service auditor to express an opinion for the current period.
       3.152 The service auditor's knowledge of modifications to the service au-
  ditor's report or deviations observed in prior engagements may, however, be
  considered when assessing risk. Such knowledge may lead the service auditor
  to increase the extent of testing in the current period. For example, if the opin-
  ion in the prior year's report was qualified because of deviations in controls over

AAG-SOP 3.148                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                        135
the authorization of user access, the service auditor may decide to increase the
number of items tested in the current examination to determine whether the
deficiency was effectively corrected.
     3.153 Generally, IT processing is inherently consistent; therefore, the ser-
vice auditor may be able to limit the testing to one or a few instances of a
control's operation. An automated control usually functions consistently un-
less the program, including the tables, files, or other permanent data used by
the program, is changed. Once the service auditor determines that an auto-
mated control is functioning as intended, which could be determined at the time
the control is initially implemented or at some other date, the service auditor
would generally perform tests to determine that the control continues to func-
tion effectively. Such tests ordinarily would include determining that changes
to the program are not made without being subject to the appropriate program-
change controls, that the authorized version of the program is used for process-
ing transactions, and that other relevant IT general controls are effective. In
instances in which the automated control is configurable, the service auditor
would consider the effect of the configurable parameters on the operation of
the control and, if necessary, perform procedures to obtain evidence regarding
the operation of the control given the effect of the parameters. Such procedures
may include obtaining an understanding of the configuration process, perform-
ing procedures to test the completeness and accuracy of the configuration pa-
rameters, and evaluating the controls over access to alter the configuration. If
the control is tested in an environment other than the production environment,
the service auditor may need to assess the risk that the operation of the control
in the production environment differs from that in the nonproduction environ-
ment and perform procedures to determine that the environment being tested
matches that of the production environment.
    3.154 If effective IT general controls are present, automated application
controls may be tested only once or a few times. In such situations, the service
auditor considers whether changes to the control made after the testing, but
prior to the end of the examination period, would change the service auditor's
conclusion regarding the suitability of design or operating effectiveness of the
control and performs additional testing as deemed necessary.

Testing Superseded Controls
     3.155 As discussed in paragraph 3.134, If the service organization makes
changes to controls during the period and the superseded controls are relevant
to the achievement of the service organization's service commitments and sys-
tem requirements based on the applicable trust services criteria, the service
auditor should obtain sufficient appropriate evidence regarding the suitabil-
ity of design and operating effectiveness of the controls before the change. For
example, during the period June 1, 20X0, to May 31, 20X1, Example Service Or-
ganization decided to automate a control that was previously performed man-
ually. The service organization automated the control on December 15, 20X0.
The service auditor tests the manual control for the period from June 1, 20X0,
to December 14, 20X0, considering the nature of the control and the frequency
of its operation, and then tests the automated control for the period from De-
cember 15, 20X0, to May 31, 20X1, considering the nature of the control and
the frequency of its operation.
     3.156 If (a) the service auditor is unable to test the superseded control
(for example, because the control does not leave evidence of its operation after

©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP 3.156
136   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  a period of time or because the service auditor was engaged after the control
  was superseded) and (b) the control is relevant to the achievement of the ser-
  vice organization's service commitments and system requirements based on the
  applicable trust services criteria, the service auditor should disclose that fact
  in the description of tests and results. The service auditor should also deter-
  mine the effect on the service auditor's report in accordance with paragraph
  .60 of AT-C section 205. If the circumstances result in a scope limitation, the
  service auditor should modify the service auditor's opinion in accordance with
  paragraph .48 of AT-C section 205. (See the relevant paragraphs within para-
  graphs .70–.86 of AT-C section 205 for reporting requirements when the service
  auditor is unable to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence.) Paragraph 4.89 of
  this guide presents an example of a separate paragraph that would be added
  to the service auditor's report when a scope limitation related to the operating
  effectiveness of controls exists.


  Using Sampling to Select Items to Be Tested
       3.157 The service auditor may consider whether to use audit sampling
  to select items for testing the operating effectiveness of controls. When deter-
  mining the extent of tests of controls and whether sampling is appropriate,
  consideration is given to (a) the characteristics of the population of the controls
  to be tested, including the nature of the controls; (b) whether the population
  is made up of homogenous items; (c) the frequency of the controls' application;
  and (d) the expected deviation rate. AICPA Audit Guide Audit Sampling may
  be useful to the service auditor when performing sampling.
      3.158 Before deciding to use sampling in a SOC 2 engagement, the service
  auditor should consider whether sampling is responsive to the assessed risk of
  material misstatement in accordance with paragraph .22 of AT-C section 205.
  This consideration may include whether

          a. due to the design of one or more systems, it may not be possible to
             give every item in the population a chance of being selected for the
             sample.
          b. the service auditor may determine that testing every instance of
             a control's operation using data analytics would be more effective
             because even a one-time failure of the control could result in a ma-
             terial deficiency in the operating effectiveness of controls.
          c. the service auditor may conclude that it is more efficient and effec-
             tive to test 100% of the population of data evidencing the effective
             operation of the control than selecting and testing a sample.

       3.159 In such circumstances, sampling may not be an effective approach
  to obtaining sufficient appropriate evidence to evaluate the effectiveness of the
  control. Consequently, in applying professional judgment regarding the extent
  of testing, the service auditor needs to consider whether the assumptions for
  sample-based testing have been met.

  Selecting Items to Be Tested
      3.160 For tests of controls using sampling, the service auditor determines
  the tolerable rate of deviation and uses that rate to determine the number of
  items to be selected for a particular sample.

AAG-SOP 3.157                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                       137
    3.161 In accordance with paragraph .32 of AT-C section 205, the service
auditor's selection of sample items should be reasonably expected to be repre-
sentative of the population covering the reporting period. Random selection of
items represents one means of obtaining such samples.


Additional Considerations Related to Risks of Vendors
and Business Partners
    3.162 Business partners, vendors, and other third parties with access to
the service organization's system may access confidential information through
the system or transmit information between themselves and the system. For
example, a service organization may obtain data used in calculations via an
automated transmission of data initiated by the vendor accessing the service
organization's system. The vendor's access results in vulnerabilities that could
be exploited by others and risks that could threaten the achievement of one
or more of the service organization's service commitments and system require-
ments.

    3.163 In response, service organization management needs to understand
the nature of those risks and assess the likelihood and magnitude of such risks.

     3.164 Processes and controls the service organization may perform to ad-
dress the risks associated with interactions with a vendor or business partner
are outlined in trust services criterion CC9.2 and include all or a combination
of the following:

        • Establishing specific requirements for vendor and business part-
          ner arrangements that include scope of services and product speci-
             fications, roles and responsibilities, compliance requirements, and
             service levels.
        •    Identifying any vulnerabilities arising from vendor and business
             partner relationships, including third-party access to the entity's
             IT systems and connections with third-party networks.
        •    Inventorying, tiering, and assessing, on a periodic basis, threats
             arising from relationships with vendors and business partners
             (and those entities' vendors and business partners) and the vul-
             nerability of the entity's objectives to those threats. Examples of
             risks may include

                 —    financial failure,
                 —    security vulnerabilities,
                 —    operational disruption, or
                 —    failure to meet business or regulatory requirements.

        • Assigning  responsibility and accountability for the management
          of risks and changes to services associated with vendors and busi-
             ness partners.
        •    Establishing communication and resolution protocols for service
             or product issues related to vendors and business partners.
        •    Establishing exception handling procedures for service or product
             issues related to vendors and business partners.

©2022, AICPA                                                     AAG-SOP 3.164
138   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          • Assessing  the performance of vendors and business partners as
            frequently as warranted based on the risk associated with the ven-
               dors or business partners.
          •    Implementing procedures for addressing issues identified with
               vendor and business partner relationships.
          •    Implementing procedures for terminating vendor and business
               partner relationships based on predefined considerations. Those
               procedures may include safe return of data and its removal from
               the vendor or business partner system.
      3.165 During the examination, the service auditor would also need to per-
  form procedures to evaluate whether monitoring controls over vendors and
  business partners were suitably designed and, in a type 2 examination, op-
  erated effectively. Paragraph 2.61 discusses monitoring controls that may be
  implemented by the service organization.


  Additional Considerations Related to CSOCs
      3.166 When the service organization uses the carve-out method for the
  services and controls of a subservice organization, the service auditor evalu-
  ates whether the types of controls stated in the description and expected to
  be implemented at the subservice organization are necessary, in combination
  with controls at the service organization, to provide reasonable assurance that
  the service organization's service commitments and system requirements are
  achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria (that is, whether the
  controls are CSOCs). For example, if the service organization is responsible for
  developing, testing, and approving program changes but has outsourced the
  actual implementation of the changes to a carved-out subservice organization,
  controls at the subservice organization would be necessary to achieve the ser-
  vice organization's service commitments and system requirements based on
  trust services criterion CC8.1, The entity authorizes, designs, develops or ac-
  quires, configures, documents, tests, approves, and implements changes to in-
  frastructure, data, software, and procedures to meet its objectives. If there are
  CSOCs, consideration would be given to whether the CSOCs and the service
  organization's controls are suitably designed to provide reasonable assurance
  that the service organization's service commitments and system requirements
  were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria, if such controls
  were operating effectively.
       3.167 The service auditor may consider performing procedures to obtain
  evidence about (a) whether the service organization has communicated to the
  subservice organization the service organization's requirements with regard to
  the CSOCs and (b) whether there is any evidence of deficiencies in the suit-
  ability of the design or operating effectiveness of controls at the subservice
  organization. Note, however, that the service auditor has no responsibility to
  communicate, in the service auditor's report, any deficiencies identified in the
  SOC 2 report of a carved-out subservice organization.
      3.168 Although a subservice organization may perform certain functions
  for a service organization, management of the service organization remains
  responsible to its user entities for performing the services it has agreed to
  provide, including the outsourced functions. As a result, management is re-
  sponsible for performing monitoring activities over the subservice organization,
  and management would include in the description controls used to monitor the

AAG-SOP 3.165                                                    ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                          139
effectiveness of controls at the subservice organization. Examples of such mon-
itoring activities are described in paragraph 2.61.

SOC 2 Report From Carved-Out Subservice
Organization Is Obtained
     3.169 As discussed in paragraph 2.61, one way service organization man-
agement can monitor the controls of the subservice organization is by obtaining
a SOC 2 report. When management has obtained such a report, management's
monitoring procedures should adequately address any description misstate-
ments or deviations identified in the subservice organization's type 2 report.
For example, if the service organization has obtained a type 2 report from the
subservice organization, such monitoring procedures should include a review
of the report to assess (a) the relevance of the system description and CSOCs
to the service organization's system, (b) any deviations requiring further eval-
uation and response by service organization management, and (c) the period
of coverage of the subservice organization's type 2 report relative to the period
covered by the current examination.
     3.170 In the preceding example, a description misstatement or deviation
identified in the subservice organization's SOC 2 report may lead service or-
ganization management to augment its system description or implement ad-
ditional controls to compensate for the misstatements or deviations noted in
the report. Alternatively, management's evaluation of the subservice organiza-
tion's SOC 2 report could result in a conclusion that the identified deviations
or exceptions in the subservice organization's SOC 2 report do not affect the
service organization's description or the suitability of design or operating effec-
tiveness of controls to achieve the relevant service commitments and system
requirements.
    3.171 In evaluating the suitability of design and operating effectiveness
of controls based on trust services criterion CC9.2, The entity assesses and
manages risks associated with vendors and business partners, management's
monitoring of the subservice organization is likely to be relevant, regardless
of whether the inclusive method or the carve-out method is used. When deter-
mining the nature, timing, and extent of testing to perform, the service auditor
may consider the results of the service organization's monitoring of subservice
organizations. This may be particularly important when the subservice orga-
nization's SOC 2 report identifies deviations or exceptions at the subservice
organization that could affect the suitability of design or operating effective-
ness of the CSOCs for which it is responsible. For example, a qualification in
the subservice organization's SOC 2 report related to CSOCs over the com-
plete and accurate creation and distribution of reports that were not identified,
evaluated, and addressed as part of the service organization's monitoring of
subservice organizations (either through existing controls or additional proce-
dures performed), could result in the service auditor identifying a deficiency in
the operating effectiveness of monitoring controls at the service organization.
     3.172 Paragraph .49 of AT-C section 205 also states that the service audi-
tor should make inquiries of management about subsequent events. In a SOC
2 examination, the service auditor would make inquiries about whether there
have been events at the subservice organization that could have a significant
effect on the description, the suitability of design, the operating effectiveness
of controls, or management's assertion. Inquiries regarding subsequent events
are described beginning at paragraph 3.245.

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 3.172
140   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  SOC 2 Report From Carved-Out Subservice Organization
  Is Not Available
       3.173 If service organization management does not obtain a type 2 report
  from a subservice organization, its monitoring of subservice organizations may
  include tests performed at the subservice organization through the execution of
  a right-to-audit clause. In such situations, management generally will identify
  such testing as a control in the description. In any event, the service auditor
  should obtain sufficient appropriate evidence of the description of the CSOCs
  and management's monitoring activities over the subservice organization in
  accordance with paragraph .25 of AT-C section 205.

       3.174 When there are CSOCs, the service auditor's report would be mod-
  ified to refer to them. Appendix C-1, "Illustrative Management Assertion and
  Service Auditor's Report for a Type 2 Examination (Carved-Out Controls of
  a Subservice Organization and Complementary Subservice Organization Con-
  trols and Complementary User Entity Controls)," contains language that may
  be appropriate when there are CSOCs.


  Considering Controls That Did Not Need to Operate
  During the Period Covered by the Examination
       3.175 The description of the service organization's system usually includes
  controls expected to operate during the period covered by the examination.
  However, in certain circumstances, some of the service organization's controls
  may not operate during the examination period because the circumstances that
  warrant the operation of those controls did not occur during that period. For ex-
  ample, controls related to providing a new user with identification and authen-
  tication credentials may not have operated if no new users were added during
  the examination period. When management informs the service auditor that
  the circumstances requiring the operation of certain controls did not occur, the
  service auditor would perform procedures to corroborate management's state-
  ment and would describe, in the description of the results of testing, the nature
  of the procedures performed and the results of such procedures. In such sit-
  uations, there is no need for the service auditor to modify the opinion on the
  operating effectiveness of the controls. This might be more common when most
  or all of the controls relevant to the achievement of the same service commit-
  ment or system requirement did not need to operate during the examination
  period.


  Considering the Relevancy of Controls That Operated
  Prior to the Period Covered by the Examination
      3.176 Certain types of controls, such as entity-level controls, may oper-
  ate with limited frequency, such as on an annual or semiannual basis. When
  service organization management identifies such controls (referred to as peri-
  odic controls in this discussion) in the description of the system as relevant to
  the system and to the achievement of the service organization's service com-
  mitments and system requirements, management would typically identify an
  examination period in which those controls operated. For example, if manage-
  ment reviews the appropriateness of logical access policies and procedures an-
  nually in October, management would likely identify an examination date that

AAG-SOP 3.173                                                     ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                        141
encompasses such controls. However, when the engagement period is less than
one year, management may not be able to select an engagement period that
includes the performance of all periodic controls. This would be the case, for
example, when a service organization's annual performance review cycle closes
in February, but the system under examination did not begin operation until
March, and the service auditor has been engaged to perform the examination
for the period April 1 through December 31. In situations such as this, man-
agement would need to determine the relevance and significance of the per-
formance review controls performed in February to the service organization's
achievement of its service commitments and system requirements during the
examination period (April through December).
    3.177 If management determines periodic controls are relevant to the
achievement of service commitments and system requirements for the current
examination period, management would include in the description information
about the design of the periodic controls and may also include the most re-
cent history of the controls' operating effectiveness. Management may consider
factors such as the following when determining whether a periodic control is
relevant:

        • Whether   the periodic control affects the operation of other con-
          trols during the period (For example, approval of an organiza-
             tional structure change before the period may affect the perfor-
             mance of controls during the period.)
        •    The length of time between the operation of the control and the ex-
             amination period (For example, a control that operated one month
             prior to the start of the examination period is more likely to have
             an effect on the performance of controls during the examination
             period than one performed nine months prior to the examination
             period.)
        •    The importance of the periodic control to the service organization's
             efforts to mitigate one or more risks to the achievement of the
             service commitments and system requirements
When management has described the relevant periodic controls in the descrip-
tion, these same factors may inform the service auditor's evaluation of the de-
scription, including whether the controls discussed in the description are suit-
ably designed and implemented.
    3.178 In some cases, relevant periodic controls may be so important to
the achievement of the service organization's service commitments and system
requirements during the current examination period that the service auditor
may determine that the lack of sufficient appropriate evidence about the design
and operating effectiveness of the periodic controls in the current period would
affect the service auditor's ability to issue an unmodified opinion. Examples of
such situations include the following:

        • The majority of the activities identified by management as ad-
          dressing trust services criterion CC4.1, The entity selects, devel-
             ops, and performs ongoing and/or separate evaluations to ascer-
             tain whether the components of internal control are present and
             functioning, operated prior to the start of the examination period.
        •    A number of periodic control activities intended to mitigate log-
             ical and physical access risks, such as scanning to detect points
             of access, identifying new information assets, and reviewing

©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP 3.178
142   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                   credentials of automated processes and vulnerability scanning,
                   were performed prior to the start of the examination period.
       3.179 When the service auditor determines that sufficient appropriate
  evidence cannot be obtained, the service auditor may (a) discuss with manage-
  ment the need to extend the current examination period to cover the period
  during which the periodic controls operated or (b) consider the effect of the lack
  of sufficient evidence about the design and operation of periodic controls on the
  service auditor's opinion.
       3.180 For other relevant periodic controls, the service auditor would con-
  sider the nature, timing, and extent of procedures to be performed to obtain
  evidence about the suitability of their design and operating effectiveness in
  the current period.7 For example, assume the service organization had a pol-
  icy requiring the annual review of the list of personnel authorized to access
  a colocation facility. Because there were only a few personnel with authorized
  access, the service auditor may have determined that performing that control
  on an annual basis was suitable; the control was most recently performed two
  months prior to the beginning of the current examination period. To conclude
  that the control is suitably designed and operating effectively during the cur-
  rent period, the service auditor obtained the list of authorized personnel from
  the colocation facility as of a date during the examination period and deter-
  mined whether any changes were made to the list during the current period.
  Because changes were made to the list of authorized personnel, the service au-
  ditor reviewed approvals related to such changes to determine that the review
  control, in conjunction with controls over the approval of changes to the list,
  result in the control continuing to be suitably designed in the current period.
  When determining the nature, timing and extent of evidence needed, the ser-
  vice auditor may consider factors such as the following:
             • The  service auditor's understanding of the nature of changes to
               the service organization's system, if any, and the assessed risk and
                   the design and implementation of related controls that may re-
                   duce the effectiveness of the design or operation of the periodic
                   control in the current period under examination (For example,
                   management may have changed one or more of its monitoring ac-
                   tivities to address significant turnover in personnel who operated
                   controls during the examination period; in this case the service
                   auditor would likely determine that it is necessary to test these
                   additional controls.)
             •     Whether the control is sensitive to other business factors that may
                   have changed (For example, annual vulnerability scanning of in-
                   formation system components may not continue to be appropriate
                   due to the discovery of a new operating system vulnerability iden-
                   tified during the examination period.)
             •     Whether the nature and frequency with which the periodic con-
                   trol operates is sufficient to provide reasonable assurance that the


       7 When the service auditor is issuing both SOC 1 and SOC 2 reports for the same system and for

  the same examination period, the service auditor is responsible for complying with the requirement
  in paragraph .28 of AT-C section 320, Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Orga-
  nization Relevant to User Entities' Internal Control Over Financial Reporting, when performing the
  SOC 1 examination. This paragraph states that evidence obtained in prior engagements about the
  satisfactory operation of controls in prior periods does not provide a basis for a reduction in testing,
  even if it is supplemented with evidence obtained during the current period.


AAG-SOP 3.179                                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                        Performing the SOC 2 Examination                           143
              service organization's service commitments and system require-
              ments would be achieved
     3.181 To reduce the risk that the SOC 2 report is misleading, the descrip-
tion of the service auditor's tests and results of tests would generally include
disclosure of the period of time during which the periodic control operated and
the results of the tests performed on the operating effectiveness of those con-
trols, as well as a description of the additional procedures performed related
to the continued operation and effectiveness of the control during the current
examination period and the results of those procedures.


Identifying and Evaluating Deviations in the Operating
Effectiveness of Controls
     3.182 In accordance with paragraph .46 of AT-C section 205, the ser-
vice auditor should accumulate and evaluate identified deviations to deter-
mine whether the deviations are indicative of a control deficiency. Once that
determination is made, the service auditor considers the significance of the de-
ficiency on the effectiveness of the controls to provide reasonable assurance
that the service organization's service commitments and system requirements
were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria. In addition to con-
sidering the effect of the deficiency on the opinion on control effectiveness, the
service auditor also considers the potential impact of other matters, such as
description misstatements.
     3.183 When a control deficiency is identified, it is usually helpful to the
service organization for the service auditor to discuss it with service organiza-
tion management in a timely manner. If the control deficiency was identified
during interim testing, service organization management may be able to reme-
diate the deficiency for the remainder of the period. In that case, when assessing
whether the deficiency is material, the service auditor would be able to consider
the effect of the deficiency during the first part of the period on the operating ef-
fectiveness of controls to provide reasonable assurance of achieving the service
organization's service commitments and system requirements. In other situa-
tions, service organization management may be unable to correct the deficiency
(for example, in instances in which the operation of the control has already oc-
curred). In such circumstances, timely notification permits service organization
management to remediate the deficiency on a go-forward basis.
    3.184 If the service auditor becomes aware that any identified devia-
tions have resulted from fraud, suspected fraud, or noncompliance or suspected
noncompliance with laws or regulations, paragraph .34 of AT-C section 205
indicates that the service auditor should respond appropriately. In a SOC 2
examination, the service auditor would ordinarily reassess the risk that the
description does not present the system that was designed and implemented
in accordance with the description criteria, the controls are not suitably de-
signed, and in a type 2 examination, the controls are not operating effectively.
Responses that might be appropriate if revision to the risk assessment is nec-
essary are discussed in paragraph 3.222.
    3.185 In performing procedures, the service auditor may become aware of
a system incident that has affected a system of the service organization that
is not the system under examination. For example, the service organization
may experience a breach in an IT system that is not a component of the system

©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP 3.185
144   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  under examination. In such situations, the service auditor needs to understand
  the nature and cause of the breach in case it occurred as a result of ineffective
  controls shared between all of the service organization's systems. If so, the ser-
  vice auditor would also consider whether there are controls in place to prevent
  a similar breach in the system under examination (for example, network seg-
  mentation). If shared controls are ineffective or there are no additional controls
  to prevent a similar breach in the system under examination, the service au-
  ditor should reconsider the assessment of the risk of material misstatement in
  accordance with paragraph .35 of AT-C section 205. Additionally, if the system
  incident is related to a security breach, the service auditor may need to con-
  sider whether the inherent risks of the environment connected to the system
  are significantly different than what was originally assessed or whether con-
  trols within the system may have been compromised by an advanced persistent
  threat that had not previously been detected. As a result of the reassessment
  of risk, the service auditor may determine that additional procedures are nec-
  essary or that management needs to identify additional controls that address
  the reassessed risks.
       3.186 Throughout the course of the examination, the service auditor may
  perform procedures other than direct tests of operating effectiveness (for exam-
  ple, reviewing results from internal audit reports or other control reports issued
  by the service organization, or reading other information received from user en-
  tities). Such procedures may identify matters that indicate control deviations
  or deficiencies (such as system incidents arising from the use of a subservice or-
  ganization) that may be relevant to the SOC 2 examination. In such situations,
  service organization management and the service auditor would generally sep-
  arately evaluate and respond appropriately to the issue or event. For example,
  the service auditor may consider information about an issue or event when de-
  termining whether adjustments are needed to the planned nature, timing, or
  extent of procedures to address any new risks identified. In addition, both man-
  agement and the service auditor would consider the effect on the SOC report,
  including whether disclosure of the issue or event in management's description
  of the service organization's system, management's assertion, and the service
  auditor's report is necessary to prevent the SOC 2 report from being misleading.


  Materiality Considerations When Evaluating the
  Suitability of Design and Operating Effectiveness
  of Controls
       3.187 The service auditor considers materiality when evaluating whether
  the effects of identified control deficiencies, individually or in the aggregate, are
  material with respect to the opinion on control effectiveness. As discussed in
  chapter 1, "Introduction and Background," the service auditor does this by con-
  sidering the effect of identified control deficiencies on the service organization's
  ability to provide reasonable assurance of achieving the service commitments
  and system requirements based on the applicable trust services criteria. If the
  service auditor concludes that the effects of identified deficiencies are likely to
  be material to the achievement of the service commitments and system require-
  ments, the service auditor would modify the opinion on control effectiveness.
      3.188 There may be situations in which the service auditor determines
  that the same control deficiency identified during the SOC 2 examinations of
  two different service organizations is material for one service organization but

AAG-SOP 3.186                                                        ©2022, AICPA
                        Performing the SOC 2 Examination                          145
not for the other. When a control deficiency is identified, the service auditor
is responsible for evaluating the effect of the deficiency by considering the ef-
fect on the system's ability to achieve the service commitments and system
requirements that management established based on the trust services crite-
ria. Although the same identified control deficiency may have resulted from the
evaluation of a particular trust services criterion, the effect of the deficiency on
the overall effectiveness of the system and related controls (that is, whether
controls provide reasonable assurance of achieving the service organization's
service commitments and system requirements) may be different at each orga-
nization.
     3.189 Decisions about the effect of control deficiencies identified during
the examination are very complex and involve a high degree of professional
judgment. Consequently, the same deficiency may result in a different conclu-
sion based on the particular facts and circumstances. For example, assume
that service organizations A and B provide cloud infrastructure-as-a-service
to commercial entities. Both organizations provide failover processing through
load balancing across geographically diverse data centers. The service auditor's
testing reveals that in both organizations the design of the failover processing
results in a likelihood that processing capacity will be 50% of peak load for the
first day of failover due to system resource limitations and the process for real-
locating resources. Company A's target market is software-as-a-service (SaaS)
entities that provide storage and retrieval of services, and its service commit-
ment around availability is based on monthly total capacity available. Com-
pany B's target market is companies that provide financial instrument trad-
ing platforms, and its service commitment around availability is based on peak
transaction-processing volume. In this example, a service auditor for the two or-
ganizations is likely to reach different conclusions when evaluating the effect
of the deficiency on the achievement of the organizations' availability commit-
ments.
    3.190 The materiality of a control deficiency is considered in the context
of qualitative factors and, when applicable, quantitative factors. Qualitative
factors the service auditor considers include the following:

         • Relevance of a control to the achievement of a specific service com-
           mitment or system requirement based on the applicable trust ser-
             vices criteria. Not all controls that have been implemented may
             need to be considered if the risk the control addresses is miti-
             gated through the application of other controls. As an example,
             assume a service organization mirrors data to a data center lo-
             cated in another city and creates tapes of the data as a secondary
             backup. These tapes are stored at a third location. Data written to
             the backup tapes is encrypted. The service organization has iden-
             tified the encryption of the tape as a control; however, service or-
             ganization management has not identified physical security con-
             trols over the tape storage location in its description because of the
             following:
                  —    The risk that both the primary data center and the mirror
                       site are destroyed simultaneously is remote.
                  —    Encryption of the data on the tapes, in conjunction with
                       effective controls over the encryption process and key
                       management, is sufficient.


©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 3.190
146   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

               In this example, physical access controls over the tape storage lo-
               cation are unlikely to be material or relevant because controls over
               the encryption of the tapes prevent unauthorized access. Accord-
               ingly, a deficiency in physical access controls is likely to be imma-
               terial to the service auditor's conclusions about whether backup
               controls are suitably designed and operating effectively.

          • Alignment  between the processes and controls stated in the descrip-
            tion and the underlying system controls implemented by the service
               organization. If the description includes a particular control, it is
               likely that report users will assume the control is material for the
               purposes of the SOC 2 examination. Similarly, report users are
               likely to expect that such controls, individually or in combination
               with other controls, operated effectively. For this reason, report
               users would ordinarily expect the service auditor to test and eval-
               uate those controls as part of the evaluation of suitability of design
               and operating effectiveness, and deficiencies noted would likely be
               considered material.
          •    The service auditor's understanding of previous communications
               made to report users about the security, availability, or informa-
               tion processing of the system and the confidentiality or privacy of
               the information it uses, based on the trust services category or cat-
               egories included within the scope of the SOC 2 examination. For
               example, if the service auditor becomes aware that the service or-
               ganization has made representations to report users about secu-
               rity (for instance, through a presentation on the service organiza-
               tion's website that indicates that all client data is kept encrypted
               at all times), the service auditor is more likely to consider those
               representations important (and thus material) to report users.
          •    Relevance to compliance with laws and regulations. If the service
               organization is subject to requirements specified by laws or reg-
               ulations related to security and other trust services categories
               included within the scope of the SOC 2 examination, identified
               deficiencies and deviations related to compliance are likely to be
               significant because they may have additional consequences to the
               organization. For example, if the service organization is required
               to meet the requirements of certain laws and regulations that
               have a direct effect on the services provided by the system be-
               ing examined (for example, laws protecting sensitive personal in-
               formation), management may establish service commitments and
               system requirements about compliance with such laws and regu-
               lations. Other laws and regulations (for example, regulations over
               the physical storage of biohazard materials, when the materials
               are stored in a warehouse with access secured by an electronic
               badging system) may be less directly linked to security or other
               trust services categories. In evaluating the service organization's
               system requirements, the service auditor may conclude such laws
               and regulations are relevant to the SOC 2 examination.
          •    Interactions with third parties. Materiality considerations are
               based on factors such as the likelihood and magnitude of risks
               arising from interactions with user entities, business partners,
               subservice organizations, vendors, or others (referred to collec-
               tively as third parties) with access to the service organization's

AAG-SOP 3.190                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                         147
             system, the degree to which those risks are relevant to the sys-
             tem, and the extent to which the service organization monitors
             controls performed by those third parties. In some cases, those
             third parties operate controls that are necessary, in combination
             with controls at the service organization, to provide reasonable
             assurance that one or more of the service organization's service
             commitments and system requirements are achieved based on the
             applicable trust services criteria. The more necessary those con-
             trols are to the service organization's achievement of its service
             commitments and system requirements based on the applicable
             trust services criteria, the more material such interactions with
             third parties are likely to be.
        •    Performance indicators related to event occurrence, detection, and
             remediation. The service organization's performance indicators
             about a system event (such as the mean time from first occur-
             rence to detection and the mean time from detection to remedi-
             ation) may be indicative of challenges in the design or operat-
             ing effectiveness of system controls; accordingly, such factors may
             affect materiality judgments.
        •    Degree to which controls are designed to identify and address
             threats and vulnerabilities that are currently unknown. Certain
             controls may have the ability to detect and address unknown
             threats and vulnerabilities. An example of such a control is a
             data loss prevention (DLP) control that monitors and restricts out-
             bound information, regardless of what caused the attempt to send
             the information externally. For that reason, deficiencies in those
             controls may be considered more significant (material) to the SOC
             2 examination.
        •    Threats related to prior periods. An identified threat or vulnera-
             bility in a prior period may affect the service auditor's conclusion
             about the suitability of design and operating effectiveness of con-
             trols for the current period.
        •    Effect of deviations. Identified deviations may affect the service
             organization's ability to mitigate threats or vulnerabilities to the
             system. For example, the service auditor may question service or-
             ganization management's assertion that a control is operating ef-
             fectively when procedures performed resulted in observed devia-
             tions in the operation of that control.
        •    Intentional acts. A deficiency or deviation may be the result of an
             intentional or an unintentional act. An intentional act, particu-
             larly one perpetrated by service organization management or se-
             nior management, is likely to be considered more material than
             an unintentional act.
        •    Effect of a control deficiency on third parties. A deficiency in con-
             trols may relate to the relationship between the service organi-
             zation and its user entities or business partners. A deficiency in
             controls at the service organization that could also result in a de-
             ficiency in controls at a user entity or business partner is more
             likely to be considered material.

     3.191 Quantitative factors to be considered in a SOC 2 examination re-
late to matters such as the tolerable rate of deviation and the observed rate of

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 3.191
148   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  deviation. (In this guide, the tolerable rate of deviation is the maximum rate
  of deviation in the operation of the control that the service auditor is willing
  to accept without modifying the opinion on any of the subject matters in the
  examination.) Quantitative factors are less likely to apply when evaluating
  the design of controls. However, when evaluating the operating effectiveness
  of the controls, the service auditor should consider the effect of identified devi-
  ations, both individually and in combination with other identified deviations,
  in accordance with paragraph .60 of AT-C section 205.

      3.192 Paragraph .18 of AT-C section 205 indicates that the service auditor
  should reconsider materiality if the service auditor becomes aware of informa-
  tion during the examination that would have caused a different materiality to
  have been determined initially.


  The Service Auditor’s Responsibility Regarding
  Compliance With Laws and Regulations
       3.193 In a SOC 2 examination, the service auditor does not opine directly
  on whether the service organization complied with the requirements of rele-
  vant laws and regulations. Instead, the examination addresses whether con-
  trols were suitably designed and, in a type 2 examination, operated effectively
  to provide reasonable assurance of achieving the service commitments or sys-
  tem requirements that management has established related to such laws and
  regulations. In most cases, management would identify system requirements
  that are necessary to support compliance with laws and regulations with which
  the service organization is required to comply. When system requirements are
  identified, the service auditor would test the suitability of design and, in a type
  2 report, the operating effectiveness of controls related to those system require-
  ments.

      3.194 Even in situations in which management has not identified specific
  service commitments or system requirements regarding compliance with laws
  and regulations, AT-C section 205 notes certain procedures that should be per-
  formed regarding compliance with laws and regulations, similar to procedures
  required related to fraud.

       3.195 In accordance with paragraph .33 of AT-C section 205, the service
  auditor should (a) consider whether risk assessment procedures and other pro-
  cedures related to understanding the service organization's system and related
  controls indicate a risk of material misstatements due to fraud or noncompli-
  ance with laws or regulations (as discussed in chapter 2); (b) inquire of appropri-
  ate parties to determine whether they have knowledge of any actual, suspected,
  or alleged fraud or noncompliance with laws or regulations affecting the ser-
  vice organization's system and related controls; (c) evaluate whether there are
  unusual or unexpected relationships within the service organization's system
  and related controls, or between the service organization's system and related
  controls and other related information, that indicate risks of material misstate-
  ment due to fraud or noncompliance with laws or regulations; and (d) evaluate
  whether other information obtained indicates a risk of material misstatement
  due to fraud or noncompliance with laws or regulations. Paragraph .A33 of AT-C
  section 205 and paragraph 3.223 of this guide discuss steps that the service
  auditor may take to appropriately respond to noncompliance or suspected non-
  compliance with laws or regulations that is identified during the engagement.

AAG-SOP 3.192                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                          149
    3.196 Although a SOC 2 report does not provide an opinion on whether the
service organization complied with relevant laws or regulations, there may be
situations in which management may want an opinion on compliance with rel-
evant laws or regulations. In that situation, management may engage a practi-
tioner to examine and report on compliance with requirements of specified laws
and regulations in accordance with AT-C section 315, Compliance Attestation.


Using the Work of the Internal Audit Function
     3.197 Chapter 2 discusses a service auditor's considerations with respect
to understanding the nature of the internal audit function's responsibilities,
and the activities it performs, to determine whether to use the work of internal
audit during the SOC 2 examination. For situations in which the service auditor
decides to use the work of the internal audit function in the SOC 2 examina-
tion, chapter 2 also addresses the need to obtain written acknowledgment from
service organization management, as the responsible party, that internal audi-
tors providing direct assistance will be allowed to follow the service auditor's
instructions without management's interference, the evaluation of the objec-
tivity and technical competence of members of the internal audit function, and
the coordination of procedures with them, among other matters. This section
discusses the service auditor's responsibility to test the work of the internal
audit function to determine whether it is adequate for the examination.
    3.198 When using the work of the internal audit function, paragraph .41
of AT-C section 205 states that the service auditor should perform sufficient
procedures, including reperformance, on the body of work of the internal audit
function that the service auditor plans to use in order to evaluate whether such
work is adequate for the service auditor's purposes.
     3.199 The nature, timing, and extent of procedures the service auditor per-
forms in evaluating the adequacy of that work depends on the service auditor's
assessment of the significance of that work to the service auditor's conclusions
(for example, the significance of the risks that the controls are intended to mit-
igate). Such procedures usually consist of one or more of the following:

         • Independent  testing of items tested by the internal audit function
           (reperformance)
         • Independent  selection of items from the population tested by in-
           ternal audit and the performance of tests of a similar nature to
             those performed by internal audit to independently evaluate in-
             ternal audit's conclusion
     3.200 Some relevant factors in determining whether to use the work of the
internal audit function to obtain evidence about the operating effectiveness of
controls include the pervasiveness of the control, the potential for management
override of the control, and the degree of judgment and subjectivity required
to evaluate the effectiveness of the control. As the significance of these factors
increases, so does the need for the service auditor, rather than the internal audit
function, to perform the procedures, and conversely, as these factors decrease
in significance, the need for the service auditor to perform the tests decreases.
     3.201 The service auditor uses professional judgment in performing pro-
cedures to evaluate the work performed by the members of the entity's inter-
nal audit function. As discussed in chapter 2, the service auditor is responsible
for determining the work to be performed and obtaining sufficient appropriate

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 3.201
150   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  evidence for the opinion. The service auditor has sole responsibility for the opin-
  ion expressed in the service auditor's report, and that responsibility is not re-
  duced by the service auditor's use of the work of the internal audit function.

       3.202 If the service auditor finds that the quality and extent of the work
  performed by the members of the entity's internal audit function are not equiva-
  lent to the quality and extent of work the service auditor would have performed,
  the service auditor generally performs additional procedures and considers the
  extent to which the work of the internal audit function may be used to obtain
  evidence.

      3.203 In reviewing internal audit reports, the service auditor evaluates
  exceptions identified by the members of the entity's internal audit function to
  determine whether those exceptions require the service auditor to alter the na-
  ture, timing, and extent of the service auditor's procedures. The service auditor
  ordinarily corroborates exceptions identified by the members of the internal
  audit function and considers the extent of the exceptions, their nature and un-
  derlying causes, and whether additional procedures by the service auditor are
  necessary.

       3.204 Another relevant factor in evaluating the adequacy of the work of
  the internal audit function is the adequacy of the sampling procedures used and
  whether the sampling procedures were appropriate and free from bias (that is,
  whether all items in the population have the same opportunity to be selected).
  AICPA Audit Guide Audit Sampling provides additional guidance that may be
  useful to a service auditor who has decided to use audit sampling in performing
  procedures.

      3.205 If the size of the sample used by the members of the entity's inter-
  nal audit function is less than the sample size the service auditor would have
  used, the service auditor generally would select additional items to achieve the
  required sample size. For example, if internal audit has selected a sample of
  25 items for testing, the service auditor may determine that an additional 15
  items need to be tested.

       3.206 The responsibility to report on the description of the system, the
  suitability of design of controls, and in a type 2 examination, the operating
  effectiveness of controls rests solely with the service auditor and cannot be
  shared with the internal audit function. Therefore, the judgments about the
  significance of deviations in the effectiveness of controls, the sufficiency of pro-
  cedures performed, the evaluation of identified deficiencies, and other matters
  that affect the service auditor's opinion are those of the service auditor. In mak-
  ing judgments about the extent of the effect of the work of the internal audit
  function on the service auditor's procedures, the service auditor may determine,
  based on the risk associated with the controls and the significance of the judg-
  ments relating to them, that the service auditor will perform the work relating
  to some or all of the controls, rather than using the work performed by the
  internal audit function.

       3.207 When using internal auditors to provide direct assistance, para-
  graph .43 of AT-C section 205 states that the service auditor should direct,
  supervise, and review the work of the internal auditors. The service auditor
  fulfills that responsibility by (a) informing the internal auditors of their re-
  sponsibilities, the objectives of the procedures they are to perform, and mat-
  ters that may affect the nature, timing, and extent of their procedures and by

AAG-SOP 3.202                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                        Performing the SOC 2 Examination                           151
(b) supervising and reviewing the work performed by internal auditors in a
manner similar to the review of work performed by the firm's own staff.
    3.208 Paragraph .45 of AT-C section 205 states that the service auditor
should, before the completion of the engagement, evaluate whether the use of
the work of the internal audit function or the use of internal auditors to provide
direct assistance results in the service auditor still being sufficiently involved in
the examination, given the service auditor's sole responsibility for the opinion
expressed.


Using the Work of a Service Auditor’s Specialist
     3.209 Chapter 2 discusses the service auditor's responsibilities when a
service auditor's specialist will be used in the SOC 2 examination. Those re-
sponsibilities include (a) evaluating the specialist's competence, capabilities,
and objectivity; (b) obtaining an understanding of the specialist's field of exper-
tise to enable the service auditor to determine the nature, scope, and objectives
of the specialist's work and to evaluate the adequacy of that work; and (c) agree-
ing with the specialist on the terms of the engagement and other matters. In
addition to those responsibilities, paragraph .37 of AT-C section 205 states that
the service auditor should evaluate the adequacy of the work of the service
auditor's specialist for the service auditor's purposes.
     3.210 According to paragraph .37d of AT-C section 205, evaluating the
adequacy of the work of the service auditor's specialist involves consideration
of the following:
        a. The relevance and reasonableness of the findings and conclusions
           of the specialist and their consistency with other evidence
        b. If the work of the service auditor's specialist involves the use of
           significant assumptions and methods,
                  i. obtaining an understanding of those assumptions and
                     methods and
                  ii. evaluating the relevance and reasonableness of those as-
                      sumptions and methods in the circumstances, giving con-
                      sideration to the rationale and support provided by the
                      service auditor's specialist, and in relation to the service
                      auditor's other findings and conclusions
         c. If the work of the service auditor's specialist involves the use of
            source data that is significant to the work of the service auditor's
            specialist, the relevance, completeness, and accuracy of that source
            data

     3.211 If the service auditor determines that the work of the service audi-
tor's specialist is not adequate, paragraph .38 of AT-C section 205 states that
the service auditor should
        a. agree with the service auditor's specialist on the nature and extent
           of further work to be performed by the service auditor's specialist
           or
        b. perform additional procedures considered appropriate in the
           circumstances.

©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP 3.211
152   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  Revising the Risk Assessment
       3.212 Paragraph .35 of AT-C section 205 states that the service auditor's
  assessment of the risks of material misstatement may change during the course
  of the examination as additional evidence is obtained. If the service auditor ob-
  tains evidence from performing further procedures, or if new information is ob-
  tained (for example, the identification of a security breach that could affect the
  system under examination as discussed in paragraph 3.185), either of which is
  inconsistent with the evidence on which the service auditor originally based the
  assessment, the service auditor should revise the assessment and modify the
  planned procedures accordingly. Such further procedures may include asking
  service organization management to modify the description, as necessary.

  Evaluating the Sufﬁciency and Appropriateness
  of Evidence
      3.213 Sufficient appropriate evidence is necessary to support the service
  auditor's opinion and report. Such evidence is cumulative in nature and may
  come from sources inside or outside of the service organization. Evidence com-
  prises both information that supports and corroborates aspects of the subject
  matter and any information that contradicts aspects of the subject matter. In
  addition, in some cases, the absence of information (for example, refusal by the
  responsible party to provide a requested representation) also constitutes evi-
  dence.
       3.214 According to paragraph .47 of AT-C section 205, the service auditor
  should evaluate the sufficiency and appropriateness of the evidence obtained
  in the context of the engagement and, if necessary, attempt to obtain further
  evidence. Concluding on the sufficiency and appropriateness of evidence is dis-
  cussed beginning in paragraph 4.08. As discussed in paragraphs .47–.48 of AT-
  C section 205, if the service auditor is unable to obtain sufficient appropriate
  evidence, a scope limitation exists and the service auditor should express a
  qualified opinion, disclaim an opinion, or withdraw from the engagement, when
  withdrawal is possible under applicable law or regulation. The service auditor
  should apply the requirements in paragraphs .70–.86 of AT-C section 205 when
  a scope limitation exists and the service auditor is determining the type of opin-
  ion to be issued.

  Evaluating the Results of Procedures
       3.215 In accordance with paragraph .46 of AT-C section 205, the service
  auditor should accumulate description misstatements and deficiencies related
  to the suitability of design of controls and, in a type 2 examination, the oper-
  ating effectiveness of controls for use in forming the service auditor's opinion.
  Misstatements or deficiencies related to a specific subject matter in the ser-
  vice auditor's opinion (for example, the description of the service organization's
  system) may affect the other subject matters in the opinion (the suitability of
  the design or operating effectiveness of controls). For example, a description
  misstatement resulting from the inclusion of controls that have not been im-
  plemented may also affect the suitability of the design of controls and the op-
  erating effectiveness of the controls because the service organization has not
  implemented those controls. Chapter 4 discusses the effect that the service au-
  ditor's opinion modification on one subject matter may have on the other subject
  matters.

AAG-SOP 3.212                                                     ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                          153
     3.216 In accordance with paragraph .47 of AT-C section 205, the service
auditor should consider all relevant evidence, which may include conducting
both a quantitative analysis (for example, rates of deviations in testing a control
using a sample-based testing strategy) and qualitative analysis of identified de-
scription misstatements and control deficiencies. That consideration is used to
determine whether such misstatements and deficiencies are material; if so, the
service auditor's opinions on the description, the suitability of design of con-
trols, and in a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness of controls might
be affected. As an example, assume that, when investigating the follow-up and
resolution of two identified system incidents, the service auditor determined
that the resolution took longer to complete than the management-prescribed
resolution requirement but that the difference was not material (for example,
final resolution took two days longer than prescribed). In that situation, the ser-
vice auditor concluded that the identified deficiencies were not material. How-
ever, if the service auditor's testing had indicated that entity personnel failed
to follow up at all for either of the two instances, the service auditor might
have concluded that the controls were not effective in achieving one or more
service commitments or system requirements based on the applicable trust
services criteria. (As discussed in paragraph 4.19, the service auditor would
disclose all identified deficiencies in the description of the service auditor's
tests and results, regardless of the service auditor's conclusion about operating
effectiveness.)
     3.217 Evaluating the results of procedures involves investigating the na-
ture and cause of any identified description misstatements and deficiencies
or deviations in the design or effectiveness of controls and determining the
following:

         • Whether   the identified description misstatements result in either
           the failure to meet one or more of the description criteria or in a
             presentation that could be misleading to users if the service audi-
             tor's opinion were not modified to reflect the identified description
             misstatements
         •   Whether identified deviations are within the expected rate of de-
             viation and are acceptable or whether they constitute a deficiency
         •   If deviations are within the expected rate of deviation, whether the
             procedures performed provide an appropriate basis for conclud-
             ing that the control operated effectively throughout the specified
             period
         •   Whether identified deficiencies are likely to have, in the service
             auditor's judgment, a pervasive effect on the achievement of the
             service organization's service commitments and system require-
             ments based on the applicable trust services criteria
         •   Whether
                  —    another tested control (or combination of controls), often
                       referred to as compensating controls, provides sufficient
                       appropriate evidence about whether controls operated ef-
                       fectively or
                  —    additional testing of the control or other controls is nec-
                       essary to determine whether the controls were effective
                       throughout the period (If the service auditor is unable to
                       apply additional procedures to the selected items, the ser-
                       vice auditor would consider the reasons for this limitation

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 3.217
154   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                              and conclude on whether those selected items are devia-
                              tions from the prescribed policy or result in a limitation
                              of the scope of the examination.)
             • The significance of the effect of such deficiencies on the achieve-
               ment of the service organization's service commitments and sys-
                   tem requirements based on the applicable trust services criteria

  Considering Whether the Description Is Misstated or
  Otherwise Misleading
       3.218 In accordance with paragraph .61 of AT-C section 205, the service
  auditor should evaluate whether the description is misleading within the con-
  text of the engagement based on the evidence obtained. Paragraph .A79 of AT-C
  section 205 states that, when making this evaluation, the service auditor may
  consider whether additional disclosures are necessary to supplement the de-
  scription. Additional disclosures may include, for example,
             • significant interpretations made in applying the criteria in the en-
               gagement circumstances (for example, what constitutes a system
                   event or a system incident) and
             •     subsequent events,8 depending on their nature and significance.
      3.219 Such additional disclosures may be presented in the description (in
  which case they are subject to the service auditor's examination procedures) or
  as other information. The service auditor's responsibility for other information
  presented in a SOC 2 report is discussed beginning at paragraph 4.101.
       3.220 Although the description should be presented in accordance with
  the description criteria, paragraph .61 of AT-C section 205 does not require the
  service auditor to determine whether the description discloses every matter
  related to the service organization's system. That is because the description is
  intended to meet the common informational needs of the broad range of SOC
  2 report users; accordingly, the description is unlikely to contain disclosures
  considered useful by every report user. For example, a description may omit
  certain information related to aspects of the service organization's system when
  those aspects are unlikely to be significant (in other words, they are immaterial)
  to report users' decisions.

  Responding to and Communicating Known and Suspected
  Fraud, Noncompliance With Laws or Regulations,
  Uncorrected Misstatements, and Deﬁciencies in the
  Design or Operating Effectiveness of Controls
  Known or Suspected Fraud or Noncompliance
  With Laws or Regulations
      3.221 As discussed in chapter 2, the service auditor has a responsibility to
  consider known or suspected incidents of fraud9 and noncompliance with laws


      8 Subsequent events are discussed beginning in paragraph 3.243.

      9 Paragraph .12 of AT-C section 105, Concepts Common to All Attestation Engagements, defines

  fraud as an intentional act involving the use of deception that results in a misstatement in the subject
  matter or the assertion.


AAG-SOP 3.218                                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                        Performing the SOC 2 Examination                            155
or regulations relevant to the examination. Such incidents may include, for ex-
ample, the intentional bypassing of controls and the intentional misstatement
of one or more aspects of the description. As discussed in paragraph 3.190, when
a deficiency or deviation is the result of an intentional act, it is likely to be con-
sidered more material than a deficiency or deviation caused by an unintentional
act, particularly if the intentional act was perpetrated by a member of senior
management. The service auditor determines the effect of such incidents on the
description; the suitability of design of controls; in a type 2 examination, the op-
erating effectiveness of controls; and the service auditor's report. Additionally,
the service auditor communicates such information to appropriate parties.
    3.222 When incidents of fraud or suspected fraud are identified during
the examination, the service auditor is expected to respond appropriately. For
example, unless prohibited by law, regulation, or ethics standards, appropriate
responses may include the following:

         • Discussing the matter with service organization senior manage-
           ment (and the engaging party, if different) and other appropriate
              parties, unless senior management is suspected to have commit-
              ted the fraud
         •    If the service auditor suspects fraud involving senior manage-
              ment, communicating those suspicions to those charged with gov-
              ernance and discussing with them the nature, timing, and extent
              of procedures necessary to complete the examination
         •    Requesting that senior management (and the engaging party, if
              different) consult with an appropriately qualified third party, such
              as the service organization's legal counsel or a regulator
         •    Considering the implications of the matter in relation to other
              aspects of the engagement, including the service auditor's risk
              assessment and the reliability of written representations from
              service organization management (and the engaging party, if
              different)
         •    Obtaining legal advice about the consequences of different courses
              of action
         •    Communicating with third parties (such as a regulator)
         •    Withdrawing from the engagement
     3.223 The actions noted in the preceding paragraph may also be appro-
priate in response to noncompliance or suspected noncompliance with laws or
regulations identified during the engagement. In addition, the service auditor
may decide to describe the matter in a separate paragraph in the service audi-
tor's report, unless the following apply:
        a. The service auditor is precluded by service organization manage-
           ment (or the engaging party, if different) from obtaining sufficient
           appropriate evidence to evaluate whether noncompliance that may
           be material to the conclusion about the suitability of design of con-
           trols or, in a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness of con-
           trols has, or is likely to have, occurred. In this situation, there is a
           scope limitation that precludes the service auditor from expressing
           an opinion on the suitability of design or the operating effective-
           ness of controls; accordingly, the service auditor would disclaim an
           opinion.


©2022, AICPA                                                          AAG-SOP 3.223
156   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          b. The service auditor concludes that the noncompliance results in the
             failure of the service organization's controls to provide reasonable
             assurance that the service organization's service commitments and
             system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust
             services criteria. In this situation, the service auditor expresses a
             modified opinion.

  Communicating Incidents of Known or Suspected Fraud,
  Noncompliance With Laws or Regulations, Uncorrected
  Misstatements, or Internal Control Deﬁciencies
       3.224 In addition to responding to known and suspected fraud and non-
  compliance with laws or regulations, the service auditor should communicate
  information regarding those matters, along with information regarding any un-
  corrected description misstatements or material deficiencies, to the appropri-
  ate levels of management (and to the engaging party, if different) in accordance
  with paragraph .87 of AT-C section 205. The service auditor may also consider
  whether to communicate other matters.
       3.225 In accordance with paragraph .88 of AT-C section 205, if the ser-
  vice auditor encounters known or suspected fraud or noncompliance with laws
  or regulations, the service auditor should consider responsibilities under the
  AICPA Code of Professional Conduct and applicable law prior to communicat-
  ing such information to management (and the engaging party, if different).
       3.226 The service auditor may be precluded from reporting such incidents
  to parties outside the service organization because of the service auditor's pro-
  fessional duty to maintain the confidentiality of client information. Paragraph
  .A125 of AT-C section 205 reminds the service auditor that disclosure of con-
  fidential information, as defined in the Code of Professional Conduct, requires
  explicit consent of service organization management.
      3.227 In circumstances in which such matters are identified, the service
  auditor may consider discussing with legal counsel or others prior to commu-
  nicating or taking further action.


  Obtaining Written Representations
      3.228 During the SOC 2 examination, service organization management
  makes many oral and written representations to the service auditor in response
  to specific inquiries or through the presentation of the description and man-
  agement's assertion. Such representations from management are part of the
  evidence the service auditor obtains. However, they cannot replace other evi-
  dence the service auditor could reasonably expect to be available, nor do they
  provide sufficient appropriate evidence on their own about any of the matters
  with which they deal. Furthermore, the fact that the service auditor has re-
  ceived reliable written representations does not affect the nature or extent of
  other evidence that the service auditor obtains.
      3.229 It is up to the service auditor to determine the appropriate person or
  persons within the service organization's management or governance structure
  with whom to interact, including considering which person or persons have
  the appropriate responsibilities for and knowledge of the matters concerned.
  In addition, in certain circumstances, the service auditor may obtain written

AAG-SOP 3.224                                                     ©2022, AICPA
                             Performing the SOC 2 Examination                                        157
representations from parties in addition to service organization management,
such as those charged with governance.
    3.230 In some cases, the party making the assertion may be indirectly
responsible for and knowledgeable about specified matters covered in the rep-
resentations. For example, the chief information officer (CIO) of the service or-
ganization may be knowledgeable about certain matters through personal ex-
perience and about other matters through employees who report to the CIO.
The service auditor may request that individuals who are directly or indirectly
responsible for and knowledgeable about matters covered in the written repre-
sentations provide their own representations.
     3.231 Written representations ordinarily confirm representations explic-
itly or implicitly given to the service auditor, indicate and document the con-
tinuing appropriateness of such representations, and reduce the possibility of
a misunderstanding concerning the matters that are the subject of the repre-
sentations.
    3.232 Paragraph .51 of AT-C section 205 indicates that, in an examination,
a service auditor should request written representations in the form of a letter
from the responsible party. In accordance with that paragraph, the following
representations should be included in the representation letter:
          a. Management's assertion about the subject matters10 based on the
             criteria11
          b. A statement that all relevant matters are reflected in the measure-
             ment or evaluation of the subject matters or assertion
           c. A statement that all known matters contradicting the subject mat-
              ters or assertion and any communication from regulatory agencies
              or others affecting the subject matters or assertion have been dis-
              closed to the service auditor, including communications received be-
              tween the end of the period addressed in the written assertion and
              the date of the service auditor's report (In a SOC 2 engagement,
              this would generally include information about misstatements
              in the description, instances in which controls were not suitably
              designed and implemented, instances in which controls did not op-
              erate effectively or as described, and communications from regu-
              latory agencies, user entities, or others affecting the presentation
              of the description or the suitability of the design or operating ef-
              fectiveness of controls, including communications received between
              the end of the period addressed in the description and the date of
              the report.)
          d. Acknowledgement of management's responsibility for
                      i. the description; suitability of design of controls; in a type 2
                         examination, operating effectiveness of controls; and man-
                         agement's assertion;



     10 Within this section of the guide, the term subject matters refers to the subject matters in the

SOC 2 examination: (a) the description, (b) the suitability of design of controls, and (c) in a type 2
examination, the operating effectiveness of controls.
     11 Within this section of the guide, the term criteria refers to both the description criteria and

the trust services criteria.


©2022, AICPA                                                                        AAG-SOP 3.232
158   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                   ii. selecting the criteria (in a SOC 2 engagement, this would
                       generally also include management's responsibility for se-
                       lecting the trust services category or categories to be in-
                       cluded within the scope of the examination and stating
                       the applicable trust services criteria and related controls
                       in the description); and
                  iii. determining that such criteria are suitable, will be avail-
                       able to the intended users, and are appropriate for the pur-
                       pose of the engagement
          e. A statement that management has disclosed to the service auditor
                   i. all deficiencies in internal control relevant to the SOC 2
                      examination of which it is aware, including uncorrected
                      misstatements;
                   ii. its knowledge of any actual, suspected, or alleged fraud
                       or noncompliance with laws or regulations affecting the
                       description, the suitability of design of controls, and the
                       operating effectiveness of controls;
                  iii. identified system incidents that resulted in a significant
                       impairment of the service organization's achievement of
                       its service commitments and system requirements as of
                       the date of the description (for a type 1 examination) or
                       during the period of time covered by the description (for a
                       type 2 examination); and
                   iv. other matters the service auditor deems appropriate (in
                       a SOC 2 engagement, this would generally include any
                       changes in the controls that are likely to be relevant to
                       report users)
           f. A statement that any known events subsequent to the period (or
              point in time) of the subject matters being reported on that would
              have a material effect on the subject matters or assertion have been
              disclosed to the service auditor
          g. A statement that management has provided the service auditor
             with all relevant information and access, as agreed upon in the
             terms of the engagement
          h. If applicable, a statement that management believes the effects
             of uncorrected misstatements (description misstatements and defi-
             ciencies) are immaterial, individually and in the aggregate, to the
             subject matters
      3.233 Other matters about which the service auditor may request repre-
  sentations generally depend on the facts and circumstances of the engagement.
  For instance, if changes to the service organization's controls have been made
  during the period covered by the examination, the service auditor may decide
  to request certain representations that address the period before the change
  and the period after the change.
       3.234 The required written representations are separate from, and in ad-
  dition to, management's written assertions. They are usually made in the form
  of a representation letter addressed to the service auditor, dated as of the date
  of the service auditor's report, and address the subject matters and periods re-
  ferred to in the service auditor's opinion.

AAG-SOP 3.233                                                     ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                        159
    3.235 When written representations are directly related to matters that
are material to the subject matter, paragraph .54 of AT-C section 205 states
that the service auditor should
        a. evaluate their reasonableness and consistency with other evidence
           obtained, including other representations (oral or written) made by
           service organization management, and
        b. consider whether those making the representations can be expected
           to be well informed on the particular matters.

     3.236 If a service organization uses a subservice organization, and service
organization management has elected to use the inclusive method to present
the services and controls at the subservice organization, the service auditor
would also request many of the same representations listed in paragraph 3.232
from subservice organization management. Obtaining written representations
from subservice organization management when the inclusive method is used
is discussed beginning in paragraph 2.105.
     3.237 Illustrative representation letters that may be appropriate for use
in a type 1 and type 2 examination are available on the AICPA website.
     3.238 In certain situations, the service auditor may become aware of in-
formation that causes the service auditor to reconsider some of the conclusions
reached to that point. For example, when obtaining the written representations
from management, the service auditor may learn about a previously unknown
security incident or a suspected fraud. The discovery of such information at this
point in the examination would lead the service auditor to consider the effect
of the matter on the risk assessment and other conclusions that the service
auditor has reached. In some cases, the service auditor may conclude that re-
assessment of the risks of material misstatement is necessary, which may lead
to the need to perform further procedures. Depending on the circumstances, the
service auditor may also consider the guidance in the next section with respect
to other actions that may be appropriate.

Requested Written Representations Not Provided or Not Reliable
    3.239 Paragraph .56 of AT-C section 205 provides guidance to the service
auditor when

        • service organization management has not provided one or more of
          the requested representations;
        • the service auditor concludes that there is sufficient doubt about
          the competence, integrity, ethical values, or diligence of those pro-
             viding the written representations; or
        •    the service auditor concludes that the written representations are
             otherwise not reliable.
     3.240 In such circumstances, that paragraph states that the service audi-
tor should

        • discuss the matter with the appropriate party,
        • reevaluate the integrity of those from whom the representations
          were requested or received and evaluate the effect that this may
             have on the reliability of representations and evidence in general,
             and

©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP 3.240
160   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          • ifisfaction,
                any of the matters are not resolved to the service auditor's sat-
                         take appropriate action, including determining the pos-
               sible effect on the opinions in the service auditor's report.

  Engaging Party Is Not the Responsible Party
       3.241 Paragraph .52 of AT-C section 205 provides the option of obtain-
  ing oral (rather than written) representations from the responsible party (ser-
  vice organization management) in an examination engagement in which the
  engaging party is not the responsible party and the responsible party refuses
  to provide the required written representations. However, in the examination
  discussed in this guide, service organization management's refusal to furnish
  evidence in the form of written representations constitutes a limitation on the
  scope of the examination sufficient to preclude an unmodified opinion on either
  the description or the effectiveness of controls. Usually, the scope limitation is
  sufficient to cause the service auditor to disclaim an opinion on the descrip-
  tion and the effectiveness of controls or to withdraw from the engagement. The
  alternative provided in paragraph .52 of AT-C section 205 of obtaining oral rep-
  resentations is not permitted in this examination.

  Representations From the Engaging Party When Not
  the Responsible Party
       3.242 When the engaging party is not the responsible party, paragraph
  .53 of AT-C section 205 states that the service auditor should request written
  representations from the engaging party, in addition to those requested from
  the responsible party, in the form of a letter addressed to the service auditor.
  In accordance with that paragraph, written representations should include the
  following:
          a. An acknowledgment that the responsible party is responsible for
             the subject matter being in accordance with the criteria and for its
             assertion
          b. An acknowledgement of the engaging party's responsibility for se-
             lecting the criteria
          c. An acknowledgement of the engaging party's responsibility for de-
             termining that such criteria are suitable, will be available to the
             intended users, and are appropriate for the purposes of the engage-
             ment
          d. A statement that the engaging party is not aware of any material
             misstatements in the description, suitability of design of controls,
             and in a type 2 examination, operating effectiveness of controls or
             assertion
          e. A statement that the engaging party has disclosed to the service
             auditor all known events subsequent to the period (or point in time)
             of the subject matter being reported on that would have a material
             effect on the subject matter or assertion
           f. Other matters that the service auditor deems appropriate


  Subsequent Events and Subsequently Discovered Facts
      3.243 Events or transactions may occur after the period of time covered by
  the examination, but prior to the date of the service auditor's report, that could

AAG-SOP 3.241                                                     ©2022, AICPA
                        Performing the SOC 2 Examination                          161
have a significant effect on the description, the suitability of design of controls,
and in a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness of controls. In such
circumstances, disclosure of those events and transactions in the description
or in management's assertion may be necessary to prevent report users from
being misled.
    3.244 The following are examples of events that could affect the descrip-
tion of the service organization's system or management's assertion:

         • After the period covered by the examination, service organization
           management discovered that, during the last quarter of that pe-
             riod, the IT security director provided all the programmers with
             access to the production data files, enabling them to modify data.
         •   After the period covered by the examination, service organization
             management discovered that a confidentiality breach occurred
             during the period covered by the service auditor's report.
    3.245 In accordance with paragraph .49 of AT-C section 205, the service
auditor should inquire of management (and if different, the engaging party)
about whether it is aware of any such events. If such events exist, the service
auditor should apply appropriate procedures to obtain evidence regarding the
events. For example, the service auditor may obtain evidence by inquiring about
and considering information about the operating effectiveness of controls by
inspecting the following:

         • Relevant
           period
                    internal auditors' reports issued during the subsequent

         • Other practitioners' reports issued during the subsequent period
         • Relevant  regulatory agencies' reports issued during the subse-
           quent period
         • Reports on other professional engagements for that entity
     3.246 Paragraph .49 of AT-C section 205 does not require the service au-
ditor to perform any procedures regarding the description, the suitability of
design of controls, or the operating effectiveness of controls after the date of
the service auditor's report. However, paragraph .50 of AT-C section 205 clari-
fies that the service auditor is responsible for responding appropriately to facts
that become known after the date of the report that, had they been known as
of the report date, may have caused the service auditor to revise the report.
     3.247 After obtaining information about an event, the service auditor
determines whether the facts existed at the date of the report and, if so,
whether persons who would attach importance to these facts are currently us-
ing, or likely to use, the SOC 2 report (which includes the description, man-
agement's assertion, and the service auditor's report). The service auditor may
do this through discussions with management and other appropriate parties
and through the performance of additional procedures that the service audi-
tor considers necessary to determine whether the description, assertion, and
service auditor's report need revision or whether the previously issued report
continues to be appropriate.
    3.248 Specific actions to be taken at that point depend on a number of
factors, including the time elapsed since the date of the service auditor's report
and whether issuance of a subsequent report is imminent. Depending on the
circumstances, the service auditor may determine that notification of persons

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 3.248
162   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  currently using or likely to use the service auditor's report is necessary. This
  may be the case, for example, when
           • the SOC 2 report is not to be relied upon because
                     — the description, management's assertion, or the service
                       auditor's report needs revision or
                     — the service auditor is unable to determine whether revi-
                       sion is necessary and
           • issuance of a subsequent service auditor's report is not imminent.
       3.249 In accordance with paragraph .49 of AT-C section 205, if the service
  auditor believes the event is of such a nature and significance that its disclo-
  sure is necessary to prevent report users from being misled, the service auditor
  should determine whether information about the event is adequately disclosed
  in the description or in management's assertion. For example, assume that, af-
  ter the period covered by the examination but prior to the date of the service
  auditor's report, service organization management learns of a system incident
  involving the loss of customers' personal information. After investigation, man-
  agement determines that the incident stemmed from an otherwise unknown
  vulnerability in its system; furthermore, that vulnerability existed during the
  examination period. In this example, the service auditor ordinarily would con-
  clude that the matter should be disclosed in the description and assertion. If it is
  not, the service auditor's course of action depends on the service auditor's legal
  and ethical rights and obligations. Therefore, the service auditor may consider
  seeking legal advice before deciding on a course of action. Appropriate actions
  may include
          a. disclosing the event (including a description of the nature of the
             event and its effect on the description, assertion, or report) in the
             service auditor's report and modifying the related service auditor's
             opinion and
          b. withdrawing from the engagement.

  Subsequent Events Unlikely to Have an Effect on the Service
  Auditor’s Report
       3.250 The service auditor may have determined that the event discovered
  subsequent to the period covered by the examination would likely have had no
  effect on the description, the suitability of design of controls, or in a type 2 exam-
  ination, the operating effectiveness of controls because the underlying situation
  did not exist until after the period covered by the SOC 2 report. However, the
  matter may be sufficiently important to warrant disclosure by management in
  its description and, potentially, emphasis by the service auditor in the service
  auditor's report. The following are examples of such events:
           • The service organization was acquired by another entity.
           • The service organization experienced a significant operating dis-
             ruption or other extraordinary event such as an event caused by
                weather or other natural disasters.
           •    A data center hosting service organization that provides appli-
                cations and technology to enable user entities to perform essen-
                tial business functions made significant changes to its information
                systems, including a system conversion or significant outsourcing
                of operations, after the date of the SOC 2 report.

AAG-SOP 3.249                                                         ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                        163
Documentation
    3.251 Paragraphs .37–.44 of AT-C section 105, Concepts Common to All
Attestation Engagements, provide requirements regarding the documentation
that should be prepared for an attestation engagement. Those paragraphs ad-
dress matters such as the timeliness of the documentation, how to make neces-
sary changes to the documentation after the original preparation date, reten-
tion of engagement documentation, confidentiality of documentation, and the
need to document situations in which the service auditor judges it necessary to
depart from a relevant presumptively mandatory requirement.
    3.252 Additionally, paragraphs .89–.90 of AT-C section 205 discuss the
service auditor's responsibilities for preparing and maintaining documentation
that is appropriate to an examination. The service auditor's documentation in a
SOC 2 examination is the principal record of attestation procedures applied, in-
formation obtained, and conclusions or findings reached by the service auditor.
The quantity, type, and content of documentation are matters of the service au-
ditor's professional judgment. However, the documentation should be sufficient
to determine the following:
        a. The nature, timing, and extent of the procedures performed to com-
           ply with AT-C section 205 and applicable legal and regulatory re-
           quirements, including the following:
                i. The identifying characteristics of the specific items or mat-
                   ters tested
                 ii. Who performed the engagement work and the date such
                     work was completed
                iii. The discussions with management or others about find-
                     ings or issues that, in the service auditor's professional
                     judgment, are significant, including the nature of the sig-
                     nificant findings or issues discussed and when and with
                     whom the discussions took place
                 iv. When management will not provide one or more of the
                     requested written representations or the service auditor
                     concludes that there is sufficient doubt about the compe-
                     tence, integrity, ethical values, or diligence of those pro-
                     viding the written representations or that the written
                     representations are otherwise not reliable, the matters in
                     paragraph .56 of AT-C section 205 (see discussion begin-
                     ning in paragraph 3.239)
                 v. Who reviewed the engagement work performed and the
                    date and extent of such review
                vi. If the service auditor has identified information that is in-
                    consistent with the service auditor's final opinion regard-
                    ing a significant matter, how the service auditor addressed
                    the inconsistency
        b. The results of the procedures performed and the evidence obtained
     3.253 If, after the date of the report, the service auditor becomes aware
of facts that may have caused the service auditor to revise the report had they
been known at the time of the report, paragraph .90 of AT-C section 205 indi-
cates that documentation in the SOC 2 examination should include the follow-
ing in addition to the items in paragraph 3.252:

©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP 3.253
164   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          • The circumstances encountered
          • Any new or additional procedures performed, evidence obtained,
            and conclusions reached and their effect on the report
          • When   and by whom the resulting changes to the documentation
            were made and reviewed
     3.254 As in other attestation engagements, documentation in the SOC 2
  examination would ordinarily also include a record of the following:
          • Issues identified with respect to compliance with relevant ethical
            requirements and how they were resolved
          • Conclusions  on compliance with independence requirements that
            apply to the engagement and any relevant discussions with the
               firm that support these conclusions
          •    Conclusions reached regarding the acceptance and continuance of
               client relationships and attestation engagements
          •    The nature and scope of, and conclusions resulting from, consul-
               tations undertaken during the course of the engagement
          •    If the service auditor uses the work of the internal audit function,
               other practitioners, or the service auditor's specialists, documen-
               tation of conclusions reached by the service auditor regarding the
               evaluation of the adequacy of the work and the procedures per-
               formed on that work
       3.255 Paragraphs .A127–.A130 of AT-C section 205 provide additional ap-
  plication guidance that might be helpful to a service auditor when deciding
  what to document in the SOC 2 examination.


  Considering Whether Service Organization Management
  Should Modify Its Assertion
       3.256 As discussed in chapter 2, service organization management pro-
  vides the service auditor with a written assertion about whether the descrip-
  tion presents the system that was designed and implemented in accordance
  with the description criteria and whether the controls within the program were
  effective. Management's written assertion is generally expected to align with
  the service auditor's opinion by reflecting the same modifications.
      3.257 The following is an example of modifications (indicated with bold
  text) that might be made to management's assertion when there is a description
  misstatement that results in a description that does not present the system that
  was designed and implemented in accordance with the description criteria:
                              [Assertion paragraph]
  We confirm, to the best of our knowledge and belief, that
          a. except for the effects of the matter described in the follow-
             ing paragraph, the description presents XYZ's medical claims pro-
             cessing system that was designed and implemented throughout the
             period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, in accordance with
             the description criteria.
          b. the controls stated in the description were suitably designed
             throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to
             provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and

AAG-SOP 3.254                                                    ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                        165
           system requirements would be achieved based on the applicable
           trust services criteria, if its controls operated effectively through-
           out that period.
        c. the controls stated in the description operated effectively through-
           out the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to provide
           reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
           requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services
           criteria.
The description states that XYZ has physical access controls that in-
corporate biometric devices and individual PINs. Although such con-
trols have been implemented throughout XYZ's main facility, they have
not been consistently implemented in the other three facilities.
     3.258 The following is an example of modifications (indicated with bold
text) that might be made to management's assertion when there are deficiencies
in the suitability of design and operating effectiveness of controls:
                             [Assertion paragraph]
We confirm, to the best of our knowledge and belief, that
        a. the description presents XYZ's transportation management system
           that was designed and implemented throughout the period January
           1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, in accordance with the description
           criteria.
        b. except for the effects of the matter described in the follow-
           ing paragraph, the controls stated in the description were suit-
           ably designed throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to Decem-
           ber 31, 20XX, to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service
           commitments and system requirements would be achieved based
           on the applicable trust services criteria.
        c. except for the effects of the matter described in the follow-
           ing paragraph, the controls stated in the description did operate
           effectively throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31,
           20XX, to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commit-
           ments and system requirements were achieved based on the appli-
           cable trust services criteria.
The description states on page XX that application changes are tested
prior to their implementation; however, the testing procedures do not
include a requirement for scanning application code for known vul-
nerabilities prior to placing a change into operation. The failure to
detect such vulnerabilities may result in the implementation of such
vulnerabilities into production. As a result, XYZ's controls were not
suitably designed or operating effectively to provide reasonable assur-
ance that XYZ's service commitments and system requirements were
achieved based on trust services criterion CC8.1, The entity authorizes,
designs, develops or acquires, configures, documents, tests, approves,
and implements changes to infrastructure, data, software, and proce-
dures to meet its objectives.
    3.259 If service organization management is unwilling to modify its asser-
tion to align with the service auditor's opinion, this may have implications for
the service auditor's opinion. For example, the service auditor needs to consider
whether report users are likely to misunderstand a SOC 2 report that includes
management's assertion and the service auditor's opinion when management

©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP 3.259
166   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  and the service auditor have reached and expressed in the same document dif-
  ferent conclusions with respect to the description, the suitability of design of
  controls, or in a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness of controls. If
  the service auditor believes it is likely that such a report will be misunder-
  stood by report users, the service auditor may decide to withdraw from the
  engagement.


  Meeting the Requirements of a Process
  or Control Framework
       3.260 When management has included disclosures about how the sys-
  tem components, including processes and controls, addressed requirements of
  a process or control framework and how the implemented controls met these
  requirements, the service auditor would consider the adequacy of those disclo-
  sures based on DC3 and DC5, respectively. This consideration would be part
  of the service auditor's evaluation of whether the description is presented in
  accordance with the description criteria. In addition, the service auditor would
  consider whether the presentation is misleading within the context of the en-
  gagement. For example, if management indicates that a particular control met
  a requirement of a process or control framework, and the service auditor de-
  termined that the control did not meet that requirement, the service auditor
  would consider whether this misstatement is material.

      3.261 Because the process or control framework would likely constitute
  a portion of the service commitments and system requirements, the service
  auditor would consider that commitment or requirement in the evaluation of
  the suitability of design and operating effectiveness of controls.

       3.262 If the service organization has not implemented one or more con-
  trols required by the process or control framework, the service auditor needs to
  consider the effect of that exception in evaluating whether there is a deficiency
  in the design of controls. There may be situations in which the failure to imple-
  ment one or more controls would have no effect on the service auditor's opinion.
  The following are situations in which an exception may or may not result in a
  deficiency in the design of controls:


          • Ifthetheservice
                      required control is not relevant to the services provided by
                            organization or its system, the exception is unlikely to
               result in a deficiency in the design of controls.
          •    If the service auditor determines that the exception is not material
               to the requirements of the process or control framework or to the
               achievement of the service organization's service commitments or
               system requirements, the exception is unlikely to result in a defi-
               ciency in the design of controls. For example, if the service organi-
               zation has received approval from the sponsoring organization to
               substitute another control for the required control, the exception
               is unlikely to result in a deficiency in the design of controls.
          •    If the service auditor determines that the exception is a deficiency
               in the design of controls, the service auditor should consider the ef-
               fect of the deficiency on the opinion in accordance with paragraph
               .60 of AT-C section 205.


AAG-SOP 3.260                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                       Performing the SOC 2 Examination                        167
SOC 2 Examination That Addresses Additional
Criteria (SOC 2+)
     3.263 As discussed earlier, when management includes disclosures about
how the system components, including processes and controls, addressed re-
quirements of the process or control framework and how the implemented con-
trols met these requirements, these disclosures are considered in the service
auditor's evaluation of whether the description is presented in accordance with
the description criteria. Procedures to evaluate the disclosures may include the
following:
        • Comparison    of the requirements of the process or control frame-
          work with management's description of the processes and controls
        • Performance   of walk-throughs and other tests of the implementa-
          tion of the required controls not otherwise covered by the service
             auditor's procedures
        •    Inquiries of management about their implementation and moni-
             toring of processes or controls required by the framework
        •    Inspection of internal audit and third-party reports evaluating the
             implementation of the process or control framework
     3.264 If management has not included such disclosures and the service
auditor concludes that the omission of such disclosures results in a material
misstatement of the description based on the description criteria, the service
auditor should modify the opinion on the description in accordance with para-
graph .70 of AT-C section 205. In addition, in accordance with paragraph .61
of AT-C section 205, the service auditor should evaluate, based on the evidence
obtained, whether the presentation of the subject matter or assertion is mis-
leading within the context of the engagement. Paragraph .A79 of AT-C section
205 goes on to state that the service auditor may consider whether additional
disclosures are necessary to describe the subject matter, assertion, or criteria.
In evaluating the description, the service auditor may conclude that disclosures
about how system components, including processes and controls, addressed re-
quirements of the process or control framework and how the implemented con-
trols met these requirements are necessary to provide intended users of the
report with the information necessary to enable them to understand the sys-
tem description, management's assertion, or the service auditor's opinion. If so,
the service auditor would modify the opinion on the description.
    3.265 The service auditor designs and performs procedures to obtain suffi-
cient and appropriate evidence to form an opinion on whether the controls were
implemented to meet the requirements of the process or control framework. In
most situations, the controls identified by management in the description will
include the controls required by the framework. In such situations, no addi-
tional procedures may be necessary.
     3.266 If the service organization has not implemented one or more con-
trols required by the process or control framework, the service auditor needs to
consider the effect of that exception on the service auditor's opinion on whether
controls were implemented to meet the requirements of the process or control
framework. However, there may be situations in which the failure to implement
one or more controls would have no effect on the service auditor's opinion. The
following are situations in which an exception may or may not affect the service
auditor's opinion:


©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP 3.266
168   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          a. If a required control is not relevant to the services provided by the
             service organization or its system, the exception is unlikely to be
             material.
          b. If the service auditor determines that the exception is not mate-
             rial to the requirements of the process or control framework, the
             exception would have no effect on the opinion. For example, if the
             service organization has received approval from the sponsoring or-
             ganization to substitute another control for the required control,
             the exception would be unlikely to be material.
          c. If the service auditor determines that the exception is material
             to the requirements of the process or control framework, the ser-
             vice auditor should consider the effect of the exception on the
             opinion about whether controls were implemented to meet the re-
             quirements of the process or control framework in accordance with
             paragraph .60 of AT-C section 205.
          d. If the service auditor has identified a material deficiency in the suit-
             ability of the design of the controls to achieve the service organiza-
             tion's service commitments and system requirements, the service
             auditor should modify the opinion on the design of controls based
             on the trust services criteria in accordance with paragraph .70 of
             AT-C section 205.
       3.267 As discussed in paragraph 3.232, the service auditor should re-
  quest written representations in the form of a letter from the responsible party.
  Because a SOC 2+ engagement includes additional matters (as discussed in
  paragraph 1.70) and additional assertions (as discussed in paragraph 2.189),
  additional representations may be appropriate. For example, in addition to as-
  serting that management has disclosed to the service auditor all deficiencies
  in internal control relevant to the SOC 2 examination of which it is aware, the
  service auditor may determine that it is appropriate for management to assert
  that it has disclosed to the service auditor any failure of the controls required
  by the process or control framework to operate as required.




AAG-SOP 3.267                                                      ©2022, AICPA
           Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report         169
Chapter 4
  Forming the Opinion and Preparing the
  Service Auditor’s Report

     This chapter describes the service auditor's responsibilities for form-
     ing an opinion and preparing a SOC 2 report. The chapter primarily
     focuses on the reporting elements of a service auditor's type 2 report
     and modifications of that report that may be necessary in certain cir-
     cumstances. It also describes situations in which a SOC 3 report may
     be appropriate and provides guidance for preparing a SOC 3 report.


  Responsibilities of the Service Auditor
      4.01 The service auditor's responsibilities in a SOC 2 examination include
  forming an opinion and issuing a report expressing that opinion. A type 2 re-
  port includes the service auditor's opinion about whether (a) the description
  presents the system that was designed and implemented throughout the period
  in accordance with the description criteria, (b) the controls were suitably de-
  signed to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service
  commitments and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable
  trust services criteria, and (c) the controls operated effectively to provide rea-
  sonable assurance that the service organization's service commitments and sys-
  tem requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.
      4.02 As discussed in chapter 1, "Introduction and Background," the ser-
  vice auditor may express an unmodified opinion on the description only if evi-
  dence obtained supports a conclusion that the description is free from material
  misstatement. When considering the materiality of identified description mis-
  statements, if any, on the description, the service auditor considers the common
  information needs of intended users whose decisions are based on the subject
  matter taken as a whole. Accordingly, it is reasonable for the service auditor
  to consider whether the description, taken as a whole, is presented in accor-
  dance with the description criteria when forming the service auditor's opinion.
  Although an identified description misstatement that results in the failure to
  meet one or more description criteria may be indicative of a material misstate-
  ment, ultimately the service auditor's opinion focuses on the effect of the mis-
  statement on the description of the system (that is, whether the misstatement
  could affect decisions made by intended users based on the subject matter taken
  as a whole).
       4.03 The service auditor may issue an unmodified opinion on controls only
  if evidence obtained supports a conclusion that controls are suitably designed
  and, in a type 2 examination, operating effectively to provide reasonable as-
  surance that the service organization's service commitments and system re-
  quirements were achieved. Although one or more control deficiencies may be
  identified during tests of controls, ultimately, the service auditor's opinion on
  controls focuses on the effect of the control deficiencies on the system's abil-
  ity to provide reasonable assurance that the service commitments and system
  requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.

  ©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 4.03
170   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

       4.04 Issuing the service auditor's type 2 report involves preparing the
  following:
             • Avicewritten description of the tests of controls performed by the ser-
                      auditor and the results of those tests
             • The    service auditor's report, including each of the reporting el-
                ements for a type 2 report identified in paragraph 4.35, and any
                   modifications to the report that the service auditor determines are
                   necessary in the circumstances
       4.05 This chapter focuses on forming an opinion and preparing a type 2
  report. Although this chapter does not provide detailed guidance for preparing
  a type 1 report, paragraphs 4.110–.111 briefly discuss differences between a
  type 1 report and a type 2 report. Appendix D, "Illustrative Management As-
  sertion and Service Auditor's Report for a Type 1 Examination," presents an
  illustrative type 1 report.

  Forming the Service Auditor’s Opinion
      4.06 When forming an opinion in accordance with paragraph .60 of AT-C
  section 205, Assertion-Based Examination Engagements,1 the service auditor
  should evaluate
            a. the service auditor's conclusion about the sufficiency and appropri-
               ateness of evidence and
            b. whether uncorrected description misstatements are material, indi-
               vidually or in the aggregate.
      4.07 Chapter 3, "Performing the SOC 2 Examination," discusses deter-
  mining whether uncorrected misstatements are material, individually or in the
  aggregate.

  Concluding on the Sufﬁciency and Appropriateness of Evidence
      4.08 Sufficient appropriate evidence is primarily obtained from proce-
  dures performed during the engagement. It may, however, also include informa-
  tion obtained from other sources, such as previous engagements (provided the
  service auditor has determined whether changes have occurred since the pre-
  vious engagement that may affect the relevance of information obtained from
  the previous engagement to the current engagement) or a firm's quality control
  procedures for client acceptance and continuance. Rates of error in testing may
  be used in assessing the risks of material misstatement and determining the
  extent of testing.
       4.09 The sufficiency and appropriateness of evidence are interrelated. Suf-
  ficiency of evidence is the measure of the quantity of evidence. The quantity of
  the evidence needed is affected by the risks of material misstatement and by
  the quality of such evidence.
       4.10 Appropriateness of evidence is the measure of the quality of evidence,
  that is, its relevance and reliability in providing support for the service auditor's
  opinions. The reliability of evidence is influenced by its source and nature and is
  dependent on the individual circumstances under which it is obtained. General-
  izations about the reliability of various kinds of evidence can be made; however,

      1   All AT-C sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.


AAG-SOP 4.04                                                                ©2022, AICPA
        Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report          171
such generalizations are subject to important exceptions. Even when evidence
is obtained from sources external to the responsible party, circumstances may
exist that could affect its reliability. For example, evidence obtained from an
independent external source may not be reliable if the source is not knowl-
edgeable. Recognizing that exceptions may exist, the following generalizations
about the reliability of evidence may be useful:

        • Evidence  is more reliable when it is obtained from independent
          sources outside the appropriate party (or parties).
        • Evidence  that is generated internally is more reliable when the
          related controls are effective.
        • Evidence  obtained directly by the service auditor (for example, ob-
          servation of the application of a control) is more reliable than ev-
             idence obtained indirectly or by inference (for example, inquiry
             about the application of a control).
        •    Evidence is more reliable when it exists in documentary form,
             whether paper, electronic, or other media (for example, a contem-
             poraneously written record of a meeting is ordinarily more reliable
             than a subsequent oral representation of what was discussed).
        •    Evidence provided by original documents is more reliable than
             evidence provided by photocopies, facsimiles, or documents that
             have been filmed, digitized, or otherwise transformed into elec-
             tronic form, the reliability of which may depend on the controls
             over their preparation and maintenance.

     4.11 Evidence obtained from multiple sources or from sources of a differ-
ent nature ordinarily provides more assurance than evidence from items con-
sidered individually. In addition, obtaining evidence from different sources or
of a different nature may indicate that an individual item of evidence is not
reliable. For example, corroborating information obtained from a source that is
independent of the responsible party may increase the assurance the service
auditor obtains from a representation from the responsible party. Conversely,
when evidence obtained from one source is inconsistent with that obtained from
another, the service auditor should determine what additional procedures are
necessary to resolve the inconsistency in accordance with paragraph .24 of AT-C
section 205.

     4.12 Whether sufficient appropriate evidence has been obtained on which
to base the service auditor's opinion is a matter of professional judgment. The
service auditor's professional judgment regarding what constitutes appropriate
sufficient evidence is influenced by factors such as the following:

        • The  significance of a potential description misstatement or defi-
          ciency and the likelihood that it will have a material effect, indi-
             vidually or when aggregated with other potential description mis-
             statements and deficiencies, on the presentation of the description
             of the service organization's system, on the suitability of design of
             controls, or on the effectiveness of controls
        •    The effectiveness of management's responses to address the
             known risks
        •    The experience gained during previous consulting or examination
             engagements with respect to similar potential description mis-
             statements and deficiencies

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 4.12
172   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          • The  results of procedures performed, including whether such
            procedures identified specific description misstatements and
               deficiencies
          •    The source and reliability of the available information
          •    The persuasiveness of the evidence
          •    The service auditor's understanding of the service organization
               (and any subservice organizations, when the inclusive method is
               used) and its environment

  Considering Uncorrected Description Misstatements and
  Control Deﬁciencies
      4.13 A SOC 2 examination is a cumulative and iterative process. As the
  service auditor performs planned procedures, evidence obtained may cause the
  service auditor to alter the nature, timing, or extent of other planned proce-
  dures, as discussed in the following list:

          • The nature and number of identified description misstatements
            and control deficiencies may change the service auditor's profes-
               sional judgment about the reliability of sources of information. For
               example, the service auditor may have discovered that manage-
               ment was unaware that detection tools were not implemented over
               a server that was a component of the system under examination.
               In response, the service auditor considered the need for additional
               testing to evaluate whether controls over the server were effective
               and whether detection measures over other system components
               were effective to mitigate the risk or detect incidents related to
               the server.
          •    Identified discrepancies in relevant information, or conflicting or
               missing evidence, may cause the service auditor to determine ad-
               ditional procedures are necessary to resolve the discrepancies.
          •    Procedures performed toward the end of the engagement may in-
               dicate a previously unrecognized risk of material misstatement,
               which may cause the service auditor to reevaluate planned proce-
               dures. As an example, assume that, while testing management's
               procedures to mitigate security incidents, a service auditor be-
               comes aware of a deficiency in the design of a control that prevents
               unauthorized access. The service auditor may determine that ad-
               ditional testing is needed to evaluate whether there are other suit-
               ably designed controls that operated effectively to mitigate the
               risk of unauthorized access addressed by the deficient control. In
               such circumstances, the service auditor may need to reevaluate
               the planned procedures.
       4.14 The service auditor also evaluates the effect of uncorrected descrip-
  tion misstatements or control deficiencies on the engagement and on the opin-
  ion. The service auditor may conclude that additional appropriate evidence is
  required to form a conclusion about the description, suitability of design of con-
  trols, or control effectiveness. In that case, the service auditor should design
  and perform additional procedures to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence in
  accordance with paragraph .47 of AT-C section 205.
      4.15 If the service auditor concludes, based on the evidence obtained, that
  the description is not presented in accordance with the description criteria or

AAG-SOP 4.13                                                      ©2022, AICPA
           Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report                             173
that the controls were not suitably designed or operating effectively, the opinion
should be modified to express a qualified or adverse opinion in accordance with
paragraph .70 of AT-C section 205. Reporting when the service auditor decides
to modify the opinion is discussed beginning in paragraph 4.47.

Expressing an Opinion on Each of the Subject Matters in the
SOC 2 Examination
     4.16 As discussed in paragraph 4.01, the service auditor expresses an
opinion on three distinct but complementary subject matters in a SOC 2 exam-
ination: (1) whether the description of the system is presented in accordance
with the description criteria;2 (2) whether controls were suitably designed to
provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commit-
ments and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust
services criteria, and (3) in a type 2 examination, whether controls operated ef-
fectively to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service
commitments and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable
trust services criteria. Depending on the circumstances, the service auditor's
opinion may be different for each subject matter.
     4.17 When the service auditor concludes that an opinion modification on
one of the subject matters is appropriate, a relevant consideration is the effect
of that conclusion on the opinion on the other subject matters. Consider the
following examples:
           • Ascription
                service auditor determines that an adverse opinion on the de-
                        is appropriate because the description discloses that cer-
                 tain controls have been implemented, but such controls were not
                 implemented and management refuses to amend the description
                 to correct the misstatement. Because such controls are necessary
                 for the service organization's controls to provide reasonable as-
                 surance that the service organization's service commitments and
                 system requirements are achieved based on the applicable trust
                 services criteria, an adverse opinion on the suitability of the de-
                 sign and operating effectiveness of the controls is also appropriate.
           •     A service auditor expresses a qualified opinion on the description
                 because management failed to disclose one or more principal ser-
                 vice commitments. The service auditor may conclude that, even
                 though the service commitments were not disclosed, the controls
                 were suitably designed and operating effectively during the period
                 covered by the examination and a qualification of the opinion on
                 the suitability of design and operating effectiveness of controls is
                 not necessary.
           •     A service auditor expresses a qualified opinion on the suitability
                 of the design of the controls because, as designed, controls do not
                 provide reasonable assurance that the service organization would
                 achieve its service commitments and system requirements based


     2 The description criteria presented in this document (the 2018 description criteria) have been

designed to be used in conjunction with the 2017 trust services criteria set forth in TSP section 100,
2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Pri-
vacy (With Revised Points of Focus — 2022), in AICPA Trust Services Criteria in a SOC 2 report. The
2018 description criteria are codified in DC section 200, 2018 Description Criteria for a Description
of a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2® Report (With Revised Implementation Guidance —
2022), in AICPA Description Criteria and include points of focus that were revised in 2022.


©2022, AICPA                                                                           AAG-SOP 4.17
174   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                on the applicable trust services criteria, even if the controls oper-
                ated effectively. The service auditor would also conclude that the
                qualification applies to the operating effectiveness of the controls.
           •    A service auditor disclaims an opinion on the description because
                of a lack of sufficient appropriate evidence about whether controls
                were implemented during the specified period. In this situation,
                the lack of evidence also leads the service auditor to disclaim an
                opinion on the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness
                of controls.

  Describing Tests of Controls and the Results of Tests in a
  Type 2 Report
       4.18 The service auditor's report for a type 2 examination, as discussed in
  this guide, contains a reference to a description of the service auditor's tests of
  controls and results thereof. Such information is necessary to enable users to
  better understand the effects of identified deviations and deficiencies on users'
  systems and controls. It also enables users to better understand the service
  auditor's opinion on the suitability of design and the effectiveness of controls.
  Table 4-1 summarizes the information to be included in the SOC 2 report when
  describing the service auditor's tests of controls and results.

  Table 4-1
            Information to Be Included When Describing Tests of
                            Controls and Results

                                            If No Deviations    If Deviations Were
      Information to Be Described           Were Identified         Identified
   The controls that were tested                  Yes                   Yes
   Whether the items tested represent             Yes                   Yes
   all or a selection of the items in the
   population (that is, clarify whether a
   sample or the full population was
   selected)
   The nature of the tests performed in           Yes                   Yes
   sufficient detail to enable report
   users to determine the effect of such
   tests on their risk assessments
   The number of items tested                     No                    Yes
   The number and nature of the                  N/A                    Yes
   deviations
   Causative factors                             N/A                 Optional
   A description of the internal               Optional              Optional
   auditor's work and of the service
   auditor's procedures with respect to
   that work, if the work of the
   internal audit function has been
   used in tests of controls to obtain
   evidence (see paragraph 4.26)



AAG-SOP 4.18                                                       ©2022, AICPA
         Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report          175
     4.19 Because the service auditor does not have the ability to determine
whether a deviation will have significance to an individual report user, the con-
cept of materiality would generally not be applied when determining whether
a testing exception is a deviation to be reported in the results of tests of con-
trols. Consequently, the service auditor's description of the tests of controls and
results would include all identified deviations. If the service auditor has not
identified any deviations, the service auditor may document those results with
a phrase such as "No exceptions noted" or "No deviations noted." An example
of a description of tests of controls in which no deviations have been identified
can be found in the illustrative description on the AICPA website.
     4.20 The description of tests of controls need not be a duplication of the
service auditor's detailed audit program, which might make the report too vo-
luminous for report users and provide more than the required level of detail.
The description of tests of controls is intended to provide report users with suf-
ficient detail about the nature and extent of the service auditor's procedures to
enable users to understand the effect of the tests on users' risk assessments.
In table 4-2, "Relevant Information When Describing Tests of Controls," the
first column identifies in some detail the information to be included in the ser-
vice auditor's description of tests of controls and results, and the second column
provides an example of the disclosure.

Table 4-2
       Relevant Information When Describing Tests of Controls

      Relevant
 Information When
 Describing a Test of
      Controls                                   Example
 The nature of the tests Observed the existence of signage in the facility
 performed (inquiry,      lobby directing personnel to contact the Ethics
 observation, inspection, Help Line to report...
 or reperformance)
 included in sufficient
 detail to enable report
 users to determine the
 effect on their risk
 assessments
 The document or            Inspected the Information Security Office Charter
 electronic file to which   to determine that
 the service auditor        • the roles and responsibilities of members of the
 referred to obtain            Information Security Office are defined.
 evidence                   • the reporting relationship of the Chief
                               Information Security Officer to service
                               organization leadership is defined.

                                                                       (continued)




©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP 4.20
176    SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  Relevant Information When Describing Tests of Controls — continued

           Relevant
      Information When
      Describing a Test of
           Controls                                Example
   The extent of testing,      Example 1:
   including whether the       For a sample of new access requests selected from
   items tested represent      the system-generated HR listing of newly hired
   all or a selection of the   employees, inspected ticket and system access
   items in the population     evidence to determine if access was granted or
                               denied based on the service organization's access
                               criteria.
                               Example 2:
                               For the full population of employees terminated
                               during the examination period, inspected the
                               related active directory account to determine that
                               it was deactivated within 24 hours of the
                               termination date.
   The title and role of       Inquired of the Data Center Security Officer
   service organization        responsible for ensuring that all visitors are
   personnel to whom           signed in based on government-issued credentials
   inquiries were directed     and escorted throughout the facility regarding
                               procedures for visitors...
   The documents, files, or    Inspected a sample of terminated employees from
   other sources from          a list generated by the human resources system
   which the tested items      and compared the termination date per the listing
   were selected               to the access card deactivation dates for each
                               terminated employee per the access system...
   Any testing performed       Inspected one daily termination report that was
   on information              generated automatically from the human
   produced by the service     resources management system and automatically
   organization                emailed to the facilities manager. Inspected the
                               system script used to generate and email the
                               report to determine whether terminations were
                               accurately and completely included in the report
                               and whether the listing routed automatically to
                               the facilities manager after generation was
                               correct.
                               (This example assumes that underlying IT general
                               controls operated effectively throughout the period
                               and that no changes were made to the associated
                               script or configurations throughout the period.)




AAG-SOP 4.20                                                      ©2022, AICPA
           Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report                             177
Relevant Information When Describing Tests of Controls — continued

       Relevant
  Information When
  Describing a Test of
       Controls                                               Example
 Procedures performed              Reperformed a sample of new customer setup
 by the service auditor            quality assurance reviews to determine whether
 when the design of                management accurately performed the customer
 management's control              setup review.3
 allows for a tolerable            Inspected the monthly quality assurance review
 rate of deviation.                results for new customer setup to determine if the
                                   results were reviewed each month to verify that
                                   accuracy rates were within the tolerable error
                                   threshold4 and that corrective actions were taken,
                                   documented, and approved for instances in which
                                   the tolerable threshold was exceeded.

If deviations were identified, users are likely to expect disclosures about the
number of items tested and the number and nature of the deviations identi-
fied even if, based on tests performed, the service auditor concludes that the
controls necessary to provide reasonable assurance that the service organiza-
tion achieved its service commitments and system requirements were effective
based on the applicable trust services criteria. In addition, when sampling is
used and deviations identified, disclosure of both the sample size and popula-
tion size are likely to be helpful to users.
     4.21 When deviations have been identified, report users may also find it
helpful for management to disclose, to the extent known, the causative factors
for the deviations, the controls that mitigate the effect of the deviations, cor-
rective actions taken, and other qualitative factors that would assist users in
understanding the effects of the deviations on the service organization's ability
to achieve its service commitments and system requirements. Such informa-
tion may be included in the description of the service organization's system or
in a separate section of the SOC 2 report to distinguish it from the description.
Such a section may be entitled, for example, "Other Information Provided by
the Service Organization." Information in such a section is not covered by the
service auditor's report (see paragraph 4.101).
    4.22 If management's responses to identified deviations are included in
the description, they are usually included in the section of the description that


     3 Even if management reports an overall accuracy rate within the tolerable threshold, a deviation

identified in the testing of management's quality assurance review would be included in the service
auditor's description of tests and results as it relates to the operating effectiveness of this control.
Accuracy of the quality assurance information is necessary in determining whether the error rate in
the population is within the tolerable threshold.
     4 Exceptions noted by management as part of its monthly quality assurance review would not

need to be included in the service auditor's description of tests of controls and results if they were
reviewed by management and determined to be within the expected deviation rate based on the design
of the control. If the deviation rate is outside of management's expected deviation rate based on the
design of the control, this may result in an exception that would be included the service auditor's
description of tests of controls and results and require further analysis by management and the service
auditor.


©2022, AICPA                                                                           AAG-SOP 4.22
178   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  lists the applicable control and related criteria. In these circumstances, man-
  agement's response would be considered part of the description; therefore, a
  misstatement in management's response may be material to the service audi-
  tor's opinion. As a result, the service auditor would generally include manage-
  ment's responses in the evaluation of the description and would perform pro-
  cedures, if necessary to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence in support of the
  service auditor's conclusions. Such procedures may include making inquiries of
  management and others and inspecting documentation. In addition, the service
  auditor may decide to describe those procedures and results in the description.
  If the response includes forward-looking information, such as future plans to
  implement controls or to address deviations, such information ordinarily would
  be included in the section "Other Information Provided by the Service Organi-
  zation." Other information that is not covered by the service auditor's report is
  discussed beginning at paragraph 4.101.
     4.23 The following example illustrates the description of tests of controls
  when deviations have been identified:
           Trust services criterion CC6.4. The entity restricts physical access to
           facilities and protected information assets (for example, data center
           facilities, backup media storage, and other sensitive locations) to au-
           thorized personnel to meet the entity's objectives.
           Example service organization's controls. Daily, a list of terminated em-
           ployees is automatically generated from the human resources system
           and routed to the facilities manager. The facilities manager compares
           the list of terminated employees to the lists of individuals authorized
           to enter the building and off-site data storage facilities, deletes the
           access card accounts for any terminated employees, and logs the com-
           pletion of this process in the ticketing system.
           Service auditor's tests of controls. Selected a sample of terminated em-
           ployees from a list generated by the human resources system and com-
           pared the termination date per the list to the date the access card
           was deactivated for each employee. Obtained one daily termination
           report that was generated automatically from the human resources
           management system and automatically emailed to the facilities man-
           ager. Obtained the system script used to generate and email the report
           to determine if terminations are appropriately included in the report
           and the listing is routed automatically to the facilities manager after
           generation.
           Results of tests of controls. For one terminated employee in an initial
           sample of 25 selected from a population of 451, the employee's phys-
           ical access security card was not deactivated until 91 days after the
           employee's last day of work. Subsequently tested an additional sam-
           ple of 15 terminated employees and found no additional deviations.

  Describing Tests and Results When Controls Did Not Operate
  During the Period
       4.24 As discussed in paragraph 3.175, in certain circumstances, the de-
  scription of the service organization's system may include controls that ordi-
  narily operate during the period covered by the examination but did not oper-
  ate during that period because the circumstances that warrant the operation
  of those controls did not occur. For example, an identified security event involv-
  ing the unauthorized access of confidential information by an entity employee

AAG-SOP 4.23                                                      ©2022, AICPA
         Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report          179
would not always trigger the operation of all recovery processes and controls
(such as restoring systems and data from clean backups and replacing com-
promised files), particularly if the event did not result in a data loss. In these
circumstances, service organization management and the service auditor would
do the following:
         • Service organization management would continue to include the
           processes in its description and may indicate that the controls did
             not operate during the period covered by the examination.
         •   The service auditor would indicate in the service auditor's descrip-
             tion of tests of controls and results that the circumstances that
             warrant the operation of the controls did not occur during the
             period covered by the examination and, therefore, no testing was
             performed.
         •   The service auditor would also indicate what testing procedures
             were performed to determine that the circumstances that warrant
             the operation of the control did not occur.


Describing Tests of Controls and Results When Using the
Internal Audit Function
    4.25 The service auditor has sole responsibility for the opinion expressed
in the service auditor's report, and accordingly, that responsibility is not re-
duced by the service auditor's use of the work of the internal audit function.
Therefore, the service auditor would not refer to the work of the internal audit
function in the service auditor's opinion.
     4.26 If the work of the internal audit function has been used in tests of con-
trols to obtain evidence, the service auditor may elect to identify which testing
procedures presented in the tests of controls section were performed by the in-
ternal audit function and describe the service auditor's procedures with respect
to that work. (The work of the internal audit function referred to in the previous
sentence does not include procedures performed by internal auditors as direct
assistance. Such tests are designed by the service auditor and performed under
the direction, supervision, and review of the service auditor; therefore, they re-
ceive the same scrutiny as if they were performed by the engagement team. In
this case, the description of tests of controls and results need not distinguish
between procedures performed by members of the internal audit function and
procedures performed by the service auditor.)
     4.27 When the work of the internal audit function has been used in per-
forming tests of controls, the service auditor's description of that work and of
the service auditor's procedures with respect to that work may be presented in
several ways. For example, it may be presented by including introductory ma-
terial in the description of tests of controls that indicates that certain work of
the internal audit function was used in performing tests of controls and that
describes the service auditor's procedures on that work. Conversely, it may be
presented by attributing individual tests to internal audit and describing the
service auditor's procedures with respect that work.
     4.28 The following are examples of introductory material that may be in-
cluded in the description of tests of controls and results when the service audi-
tor elects to inform report users that the service auditor has used the work of
the internal audit function:

©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP 4.28
180   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          • Throughout the examination period, members of Example Service
            Organization's internal audit function performed tests of controls
               related to trust services criterion CC6.1, The entity implements
               logical access security software, infrastructure, and architectures
               over protected information assets to protect them from security
               events to meet the entity's objectives. Members of the internal au-
               dit function observed the controls being performed by employees,
               inspected documentation of the performance of the control, and
               reperformed a sample of control activities. The tests performed by
               the members of the internal audit function and the results of those
               tests are presented under the captions "Tests Performed" and "Re-
               sults of Tests." We reperformed selected tests that had been per-
               formed by members of the internal audit function and found no
               exceptions.
          •    Members of Example Service Organization's internal audit func-
               tion performed tests of controls for trust services criterion CC6.1,
               The entity implements logical access security software, infrastruc-
               ture, and architectures over protected information assets to protect
               them from security events to meet the entity's objectives. The tests
               performed by members of the internal audit function included in-
               quiry of employees who performed the control activities, observa-
               tion of the control being performed at different times during the
               examination period, reperformance, and examination of the docu-
               mentation for a sample of requests for system access and a sam-
               ple of requests for reports. The tests performed by the members
               of the internal audit function and the results of those tests are
               presented under the captions "Tests Performed" and "Results of
               Tests." We tested the work of members of the internal audit func-
               tion through a combination of independent testing and reperfor-
               mance and noted no exceptions.
       4.29 The following are examples of descriptions of tests of controls and
  results that identify the tests performed by the internal audit function and
  attribute that work to them:
           Example 1
           When withdrawal requests are received, the processing clerk com-
           pares the name of the individual requesting the withdrawal to a client-
           provided list of individuals authorized to make such requests. The pro-
           cessing clerk who performs this control initials the request form to
           indicate that the comparison has been performed. Requests from in-
           dividuals whose names are not on the client-provided list are rejected
           and sent back to the client.
           Tests Performed by the Internal Audit Function
                   • Inquired  of the processing clerk responsible for perform-
                     ing the control regarding the procedures performed when
                       a withdrawal request is received.
                   •   Observed the employee performing the control on multi-
                       ple occasions throughout the examination period.
                   •   For a sample of withdrawals made during the examina-
                       tion period that were selected from the payments regis-
                       ter, compared the name on the withdrawal request to the
                       client-provided list of individuals authorized to make such

AAG-SOP 4.29                                                     ©2022, AICPA
        Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report           181
                     requests, and determined that the request had been ini-
                     tialed by the processing clerk.
        Tests Performed by the Service Auditor
                 •  Inquired of the processing clerk responsible for perform-
                    ing the control regarding the procedures performed when
                    a withdrawal request is received.
                 •  For a sample of items tested by members of the internal
                    audit function, reperformed the test.
                 •  For an additional sample of withdrawals made during the
                    examination period that were selected from the payments
                    register, compared the name on the withdrawal request to
                    the client-provided list of employees authorized to make
                    such requests, and determined that the request had been
                    initialed by the processing clerk.
        Results of Tests
                 •   No exceptions noted.
        Example 2
        When withdrawal requests are received, the processing clerk com-
        pares the name of the individual requesting the withdrawal to a client-
        provided list of employees authorized to make such requests. The clerk
        performing this control initials the request form or electronic request
        to indicate that the comparison has been performed. Requests from in-
        dividuals who are not on the client-provided list are rejected and sent
        back to the client.
        Tests Performed
                 •   Members of the internal audit function inquired of the
                     clerk responsible for performing the control regarding
                     the procedures followed when withdrawal requests are
                     received.
                 •   Members of the internal audit function made multiple ob-
                     servations throughout the examination period of the clerk
                     performing the control.
                 •   For a sample of withdrawals during the examination pe-
                     riod that were selected from the payments register, the
                     members of the internal audit function and the service au-
                     ditor compared the name on the withdrawal request form
                     or electronic request to the client-provided list of individu-
                     als authorized to make such requests and determined that
                     the request had been initialed by the processing clerk.
                 •   The service auditor reperformed the testing for a sample
                     of items tested by members of the internal audit function.
        Results of Tests
                 •   No exceptions noted.

Describing Tests of the Reliability of Information Produced by the
Service Organization
     4.30 As discussed in paragraph 3.138, the service auditor should evalu-
ate whether information produced by the service organization is sufficiently
reliable for the service auditor's purposes. The service auditor's procedures to

©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP 4.30
182   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  assess the reliability of such information would generally be included in the
  description of tests of controls and results. The service auditor may
          •    provide this information in summary form in the description of
               tests of controls and results.
          •    identify the individual procedures performed on a control-by-
               control basis.
          •    present this information using both of these methods, depending
               on the nature of the information produced by the service organi-
               zation (that is, information provided to user entities, information
               used in the execution of a control, or information provided in re-
               sponse to ad hoc requests from the service auditor).
       4.31 One presentation method may be more appropriate than another de-
  pending on the circumstances. For example, when the service auditor performs
  procedures to assess the reliability of information used in the examination or
  information prepared for use in the operation of a control, including a descrip-
  tion of the detailed procedures performed by the service auditor on a control-by-
  control basis may be more useful than information provided in summary form.
      4.32 When the service auditor decides to present the information in sum-
  mary form, language such as the following may be added as a lead-in to the
  description of tests of controls and results:
           Information Produced by the Entity
           For tests of controls requiring the use of information produced by the
           entity (IPE), including electronic information (for example, controls re-
           quiring system-generated populations for sample-based testing), we
           performed a combination of the following procedures where possible —
           based on the nature of the IPE — to address the completeness, accu-
           racy, and data integrity of the data or reports used:
                    •    Inspected the source of the IPE
                    •    Inspected the query, script, or parameters used to gener-
                         ate the IPE
                    •    Tied data between the IPE and the source
                    •    Inspected the IPE for anomalous gaps in sequence or tim-
                         ing to determine that the data is complete, accurate, and
                         maintains its integrity
           For tests of controls requiring management's use of IPE in the execu-
           tion of the controls (for example, management's monitoring of alerts
           generated by its intrusion prevention system [IPS]), we performed ad-
           ditional procedures including, but not limited to, inspecting evidence
           of authorization for users with access to administer and modify IPS
           configurations, a selection of changes to configurations, and updates
           applied to the IPS during the examination period. We inspected evi-
           dence of management's procedures, as applicable, to assess the valid-
           ity of the IPE source and the completeness, accuracy, and integrity of
           the data or reports.
      4.33 When the service auditor decides to provide details about the pro-
  cedures performed and results thereof, language such as the following may be
  included in the description of tests of controls and results:
          Observation and inspection procedures were performed related to
          [system-generated reports, queries, and listings] to assess the accu-
          racy and completeness (reliability) of the information [used in the
AAG-SOP 4.31                                                      ©2022, AICPA
             Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report                     183
             performance of our testing of the controls or used by the service organi-
             zation in the execution of controls].
             Obtained a system-generated listing of terminated employees from the
             human resources management system and inspected the queries used
             to generate the listing to determine whether it included the appropri-
             ate date-selection criteria and record types for terminated employees.

Preparing the Service Auditor’s SOC 2 Report
Elements of the Service Auditor’s SOC 2 Report
     4.34 AT-C section 205 identifies the elements to be included in a service
auditor's examination report. It also provides requirements for adding a para-
graph to the report to restrict its use in certain circumstances. Table 4-3, "El-
ements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report," identifies the requirements in
paragraphs .63–.65 of AT-C section 205 on which each element of a SOC 2 re-
port is based. Appendix C-1, "Illustrative Management Assertion and Service
Auditor's Report for a Type 2 Examination (Carved-Out Controls of a Subser-
vice Organization and Complementary Subservice Organization Controls and
Complementary User Entity Controls)," presents an illustrative service audi-
tor's type 2 report.
     4.35 The "Illustrative Service Auditor's Type 2 Report Language" column
of the table illustrates language that would be used in a type 2 report5 for a ser-
vice organization that outsources certain aspects of its system to a subservice
organization and elects to use the carve-out method for the subservice orga-
nization. In addition, the language in that column assumes that complemen-
tary user entity controls (CUECs) and complementary subservice organization
controls (CSOCs) are required. Language shown in boldface italics is only in-
cluded when the service organization uses one or more subservice organizations
and there are CUECs and CSOCs.
Table 4-3
                 Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report

  Reference
   to AT-C
 Section 205
  Require-
  ment on           AT-C Section
 Which the              205
    SOC 2           Requirements
 Reporting          and Relevant          SOC 2 Reporting              Illustrative Service
 Element Is          Application           Elements and                  Auditor’s Type 2
    Based             Guidance          Additional Guidance             Report Language
 par. .63a         A title that      The service auditor's           Independent Service
                   includes the word report should include a         Auditor's Report
                   independent       title that includes the
                                     word independent.

                                                                                   (continued)

     5 Although the table presents the reporting requirements of a type 2 report, many of the re-

quirements would also apply to a type 1 report. Appendix D, "Illustrative Management Assertion and
Service Auditor's Report for a Type 1 Examination," presents an illustrative type 1 report.


©2022, AICPA                                                                      AAG-SOP 4.35
184   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

         Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on       AT-C Section
   Which the          205
      SOC 2       Requirements
   Reporting      and Relevant         SOC 2 Reporting            Illustrative Service
   Element Is      Application          Elements and                Auditor’s Type 2
      Based         Guidance         Additional Guidance           Report Language
   par. .63b     An appropriate      An appropriate              To: Management of XYZ
                 addressee as        addressee is determined     Service Organization
                 required by the     by the circumstances of
                 circumstances of    the engagement. (In
                 the engagement      most cases, the service
                                     auditor is engaged by
                                     the service organization
                                     and would address the
                                     service auditor's report
                                     to management of the
                                     service organization.
                                     However, the service
                                     auditor may be engaged
                                     by one or more user
                                     entities or the board of
                                     directors of the service
                                     organization and, in
                                     such cases, would
                                     address and provide the
                                     report to the party that
                                     engaged the service
                                     auditor.)
   par. .63c     An identification   AT-C section 205,           Scope
                 or description of   Assertion-Based             We have examined XYZ
                 the subject         Examination                 Service Organization's
                 matter or           Engagements, permits a      accompanying
                 assertion being     service auditor to report   description of its [type
                 reported on,        on either management's      or name] system titled
                 including the       assertion or directly on    [insert title of
                 point in time or    the subject matter. In a    management's
                 period of time to   SOC 2 engagement            description] throughout
                 which the           described in this guide,    the period [date] to
                 measurement or      however, the service        [date] (description)
                 evaluation of the   auditor reports directly    based on the criteria for
                 subject matter or   on the subject matters.     a description of a
                 assertion relates   The report should           service organization's
                                     identify the subject        system in DC section
                                     matters of a SOC 2          200, 2018 Description
                                     examination, which          Criteria for a
                                     generally include the       Description of a Service
                                     following:                  Organization's System




AAG-SOP 4.35                                                             ©2022, AICPA
       Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report              185
    Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

 Reference
  to AT-C
Section 205
 Require-
 ment on      AT-C Section
Which the         205
   SOC 2      Requirements
Reporting     and Relevant       SOC 2 Reporting            Illustrative Service
Element Is     Application        Elements and                Auditor’s Type 2
   Based        Guidance       Additional Guidance           Report Language
                               1. A description of the     in a SOC 2® Report,
                                  service                  (description criteria)
                                  organization's           and the suitability of
                                  system, the function     the design and
                                  performed by the         operating effectiveness
                                  system, and the          of controls stated in the
                                  period to which the      description throughout
                                  description relates      the period [date] to
                               2. The description          [date] to provide
                                  criteria used to         reasonable assurance
                                  evaluate the             that XYZ's service
                                  description              commitments and
                                                           system requirements
                               3. The applicable trust
                                                           were achieved based on
                                  services criteria used
                                                           the trust services
                                  to evaluate whether
                                                           criteria relevant to
                                  the controls stated in
                                                           security, availability,
                                  the description were
                                                           processing integrity,
                                  suitably designed
                                                           confidentiality, and
                                  and operating
                                                           privacy (applicable
                                  effectively to provide
                                                           trust services criteria)
                                  reasonable
                                                           set forth in TSP section
                                  assurance that the
                                                           100, 2017 Trust Services
                                  service
                                                           Criteria for Security,
                                  organization's
                                                           Availability, Processing
                                  service commitments
                                                           Integrity,
                                  and system
                                                           Confidentiality, and
                                  requirements were
                                                           Privacy (With Revised
                                  achieved
                                                           Points of Focus — 2022).

                                                                       (continued)




©2022, AICPA                                                          AAG-SOP 4.35
186   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

        Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on      AT-C Section
   Which the         205
      SOC 2      Requirements
   Reporting     and Relevant        SOC 2 Reporting          Illustrative Service
   Element Is     Application         Elements and              Auditor’s Type 2
      Based        Guidance        Additional Guidance         Report Language
                                  If the service            XYZ uses a subservice
                                  organization uses a       organization to
                                  subservice organization   provide application
                                  and service organization  maintenance and
                                  management has            support services. The
                                  determined that           description indicates
                                  complementary controls    that complementary
                                  at the subservice         subservice
                                  organization that are     organization controls
                                  suitably designed and     that are suitably
                                  operating effectively are designed and
                                  necessary, along with     operating effectively
                                  controls at the service   are necessary, along
                                  organization, to achieve  with controls at XYZ,
                                  the service               to achieve XYZ’s
                                  organization's service    service commitments
                                  commitments or system     and system
                                  requirements based on     requirements based
                                  the applicable trust      on the applicable
                                  services criteria, the    trust services criteria.
                                  report will generally     The description
                                  include the following:    presents XYZ’s
                                  1. A statement that the   controls, the
                                      service organization  applicable trust
                                      uses a subservice     services criteria, and
                                      organization          the types of
                                                            complementary
                                   2. An identification of
                                                            subservice
                                      the types of services
                                                            organization controls
                                      or functions provided
                                                            assumed in the design
                                      by the subservice
                                                            of XYZ’s controls. The
                                      organization
                                                            description does not




AAG-SOP 4.35                                                       ©2022, AICPA
           Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report                              187
       Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

  Reference
   to AT-C
 Section 205
  Require-
  ment on           AT-C Section
 Which the              205
    SOC 2           Requirements
 Reporting          and Relevant             SOC 2 Reporting                Illustrative Service
 Element Is          Application              Elements and                    Auditor’s Type 2
    Based             Guidance             Additional Guidance               Report Language
                                           3. An indication of            disclose the actual
                                              whether the controls        controls at the
                                              at the subservice           subservice
                                              organization are            organization. Our
                                              included in the             examination did not
                                              description and in          include the services
                                              the service auditor's       provided by the
                                              examination6                subservice
                                           4. If management               organization, and we
                                              elects to carve out         have not evaluated
                                              the subservice              the suitability of the
                                              organization's              design or operating
                                              controls from the           effectiveness of such
                                              description and from        complementary
                                              the service auditor's       subservice
                                              examination, a              organization
                                              statement that              controls.
                                               a. the description         The description
                                                   indicates that         indicates that
                                                   complementary          complementary user
                                                   subservice             entity controls that
                                                   organization           are suitably designed
                                                   controls               and operating
                                                   (CSOCs) that           effectively are
                                                   are suitably           necessary, along with
                                                   designed and           controls at XYZ, to
                                                   operating              achieve XYZ’s service
                                                   effectively are        commitments and
                                                   necessary, along       system requirements
                                                   with controls at       based on the
                                                   the service            applicable trust
                                                   organization, to       services criteria. The
                                                   achieve the            description presents
                                                   service                XYZ’s controls, the

                                                                                         (continued)


     6   Column 4 illustrates only the service auditor's report language when the subservice organi-
zation's controls have been "carved-out" of the description and the service auditor's examination. If
service organization management has elected to include such controls in the description and within
the scope of the service auditor's examination, the subservice organization is also a responsible party,
and additional language should be added to the service auditor's report to refer to its responsibilities.
Appendix C-2, "Illustrative Service Organization and Subservice Organization Management Asser-
tions and Service Auditor's Report for a Type 2 Examination (Subservice Organization Presented Us-
ing the Inclusive Method and Complementary User Entity Controls)," illustrates a service auditor's
report on a type 2 examination in which the inclusive method is used.


©2022, AICPA                                                                           AAG-SOP 4.35
188   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

         Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on          AT-C Section
   Which the             205
      SOC 2          Requirements
   Reporting         and Relevant            SOC 2 Reporting               Illustrative Service
   Element Is         Application             Elements and                   Auditor’s Type 2
      Based            Guidance            Additional Guidance              Report Language
                                                    organization's       applicable trust
                                                    service              services criteria, and
                                                    commitments          the complementary
                                                    and system           user entity controls
                                                    requirements         assumed in the design
                                                    based on the         of XYZ’s controls. Our
                                                    applicable trust     examination did not
                                                    services             include such
                                                    criteria;            complementary user
                                                b. the description       entity controls and we
                                                   presents the          have not evaluated
                                                   types of CSOCs        the suitability of the
                                                   assumed in the        design or operating
                                                   design of XYZ's       effectiveness of such
                                                   controls;7 and        controls.
                                                c. the description
                                                   does not
                                                   disclose the
                                                   actual controls
                                                   at the
                                                   subservice
                                                   organization
                                              The service auditor
                                              is likely to also
                                              include a statement
                                              that the examination
                                              did not include the
                                              services provided by
                                              the subservice
                                              organization and
                                              that the service
                                              auditor has not
                                              evaluated the
                                              suitability of the
                                              design or operating
                                              effectiveness of the
                                              CSOCs.




       7 As noted in later portions of columns 3 and 4, the service auditor's opinion is also modified

  when there are complementary subservice organization controls (CSOCs) and complementary user
  entity controls (CUECs).


AAG-SOP 4.35                                                                     ©2022, AICPA
       Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report             189
    Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

 Reference
  to AT-C
Section 205
 Require-
 ment on      AT-C Section
Which the         205
   SOC 2      Requirements
Reporting     and Relevant       SOC 2 Reporting           Illustrative Service
Element Is     Application        Elements and               Auditor’s Type 2
   Based        Guidance       Additional Guidance          Report Language
                               5. If service
                                  organization
                                  management has
                                  determined that
                                  complementary user
                                  entity controls
                                  (CUECs) that are
                                  suitably designed
                                  and operating
                                  effectively are
                                  necessary, along with
                                  controls at the
                                  service organization,
                                  to achieve one or
                                  more of the service
                                  organization's
                                  service commitments
                                  or system
                                  requirements based
                                  on the applicable
                                  trust services
                                  criteria, the report
                                  will generally
                                  include a statement
                                  that
                                   a. the description
                                        indicates that
                                        CUECs that are
                                        suitably
                                        designed and
                                        operating
                                        effectively are
                                        necessary, along
                                        with controls at
                                        the service
                                        organization, to
                                        achieve the
                                        service

                                                                     (continued)




©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 4.35
190   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

         Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on          AT-C Section
   Which the             205
      SOC 2          Requirements
   Reporting         and Relevant           SOC 2 Reporting              Illustrative Service
   Element Is         Application            Elements and                  Auditor’s Type 2
      Based            Guidance           Additional Guidance             Report Language
                                                   organization's
                                                   service
                                                   commitments
                                                   and system
                                                   requirements
                                                   based on the
                                                   applicable trust
                                                   services
                                                   criteria;
                                               b. the description
                                                  presents the
                                                  service
                                                  organization's
                                                  controls, the
                                                  applicable trust
                                                  services
                                                  criteria, and the
                                                  CUECs
                                                  assumed in the
                                                  design of the
                                                  service
                                                  organization's
                                                  controls;
                                               c. the
                                                  examination did
                                                  not include such
                                                  CUECs and the
                                                  service auditor
                                                  has not
                                                  evaluated the
                                                  suitability of
                                                  the design or
                                                  operating
                                                  effectiveness of
                                                  such controls8




     8 As noted in later portions of columns 3 and 4, the service auditor's opinion is also modified

  when there are CSOCS and CUECs.


AAG-SOP 4.35                                                                   ©2022, AICPA
             Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report                             191
        Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

  Reference
   to AT-C
 Section 205
  Require-
  ment on           AT-C Section
 Which the              205
    SOC 2           Requirements
 Reporting          and Relevant              SOC 2 Reporting                Illustrative Service
 Element Is          Application               Elements and                    Auditor’s Type 2
    Based             Guidance              Additional Guidance               Report Language
  par. .63d        An identification       In a SOC 2                      [See scope paragraph of
                   of the criteria         examination, the                report]
                   against which           description is evaluated
                   the subject             against the description
                   matter was              criteria and the
                   measured or             suitability of design and
                   evaluated               operating effectiveness
                                           of controls are
                                           evaluated against the
                                           trust services criteria
                                           relevant to the
                                           categories addressed by
                                           the examination
                                           (applicable trust
                                           services criteria). A
                                           reference to both sets of
                                           criteria should be
                                           included in the scope
                                           paragraph of the service
                                           auditor's report.
 par. .63e         A statement that        The report should               Service Organization's
                   identifies the          include an identification       Responsibilities
                   responsible party       of the responsible              XYZ is responsible for
                   and its                 party9 and its                  its service commitments
                   responsibility for      responsibilities, which         and system
                   the subject             generally include               requirements and for
                   matter being in         statements that service         designing,
                   accordance with         organization                    implementing, and
                   (or based on) the       management is                   operating effective
                   criteria or for its     responsible for the             controls within the
                   assertion               following:                      system to provide

                                                                                          (continued)




      9 As discussed in the preceding footnote, if controls at the subservice organization are included in

the description and within the scope of the service auditor's examination, the subservice organization
is also a responsible party, and additional language should be added to the service auditor's report to
refer to its responsibilities. Appendix C-2 illustrates a service auditor's report on a type 2 examination
in which the inclusive method is used.


©2022, AICPA                                                                            AAG-SOP 4.35
192   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

        Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on      AT-C Section
   Which the         205
      SOC 2      Requirements
   Reporting     and Relevant        SOC 2 Reporting           Illustrative Service
   Element Is     Application         Elements and               Auditor’s Type 2
      Based        Guidance        Additional Guidance          Report Language
                                   1. The service             reasonable assurance
                                      organization's          that XYZ's service
                                      service commitments     commitments and
                                      and system              system requirements
                                      requirements and for    were achieved. XYZ has
                                      designing,              provided the
                                      implementing, and       accompanying
                                      operating effective     assertion, titled [insert
                                      controls within the     the title of the attached
                                      system to provide       management assertion]
                                      reasonable              (assertion), about the
                                      assurance that the      description and the
                                      service                 suitability of design and
                                      organization's          operating effectiveness
                                      service commitments     of controls stated
                                      and system              therein. XYZ is also
                                      requirements were       responsible for
                                      achieved                preparing the
                                   2. Providing the           description and
                                      assertion about the     assertion, including the
                                      description and the     completeness, accuracy,
                                      suitability of design   and method of
                                      and operating           presentation of the
                                      effectiveness of        description and
                                      controls stated         assertion; providing the
                                      therein                 services covered by the
                                                              description; selecting
                                   3. Preparing the
                                                              the applicable trust
                                      description of the
                                                              services criteria and
                                      service
                                                              stating the related
                                      organization's
                                                              controls in the
                                      system and the
                                                              description; and
                                      assertion, including
                                                              identifying the risks
                                      the completeness,
                                                              that threaten the
                                      accuracy, and
                                                              achievement of the
                                      method of
                                                              service organization's
                                      presentation of the
                                                              service commitments
                                      description and
                                                              and system
                                      assertion
                                                              requirements.
                                   4. Providing the
                                      services covered by
                                      the description




AAG-SOP 4.35                                                         ©2022, AICPA
            Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report                193
      Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

 Reference
  to AT-C
Section 205
 Require-
 ment on          AT-C Section
Which the             205
   SOC 2          Requirements
Reporting         and Relevant          SOC 2 Reporting            Illustrative Service
Element Is         Application           Elements and                Auditor’s Type 2
   Based            Guidance          Additional Guidance           Report Language
                                      5. Selecting the
                                         applicable trust
                                         services criteria
                                         addressed by the
                                         examination and
                                         stating the related
                                         controls in the
                                         description of the
                                         service
                                         organization's
                                         system
                                      6. Identifying the risks
                                         that threaten the
                                         achievement of the
                                         service
                                         organization's
                                         service commitments
                                         and system
                                         requirements
par. .63f        A statement that     As noted previously, in a   Service Auditor's
                 the practitioner's   SOC 2 engagement, the       Responsibilities
                 responsibility is    service auditor reports     Our responsibility is to
                 to express an        directly on the subject     express an opinion on
                 opinion on the       matters, not on             the description and on
                 subject matter or    management's                the suitability of design
                 assertion, based     assertion.                  and operating
                 on the               The report should           effectiveness of controls
                 practitioner's       include a statement         stated in the description
                 examination          that the service auditor    based on our
                                      is responsible for          examination.
                                      expressing an opinion
                                      on the description and
                                      on the suitability and
                                      design of controls stated
                                      in the description, based
                                      on the service auditor's
                                      examination.

                                                                              (continued)




©2022, AICPA                                                                 AAG-SOP 4.35
194   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

        Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on       AT-C Section
   Which the          205
      SOC 2       Requirements
   Reporting      and Relevant          SOC 2 Reporting            Illustrative Service
   Element Is      Application           Elements and                Auditor’s Type 2
      Based         Guidance          Additional Guidance           Report Language
   par. .63g     A statement that     As noted previously, in a   Our examination was
                  i. the              SOC 2 engagement, the       conducted in accordance
                     practitioner's   service auditor reports     with attestation
                     examination      directly on the subject     standards established
                     was              matters, not on             by the AICPA. Those
                     conducted in     management's                standards require that
                     accordance       assertion.                  we plan and perform
                     with             In applying these           our examination to
                     attestation      requirements, the           obtain reasonable
                     standards        service auditor             assurance about
                     established by   generally includes in       whether, in all material
                     the AICPA        the report the following    respects, the description
                                      statements:                 is presented in
                 ii. those
                                                                  accordance with the
                     standards        1. The examination          description criteria and
                     require that        was conducted in         the controls stated
                     the                 accordance with          therein were suitably
                     practitioner        attestation              designed and operated
                     plan and            standards                effectively to provide
                     perform the         established by the       reasonable assurance
                     examination         AICPA.                   that the service
                     to obtain        2. Those standards          organization's service
                     reasonable          require that the         commitments and
                     assurance           service auditor plan     system requirements
                     about               and perform the          were achieved based on
                     whether             examination to           the applicable trust
                    (1) the              obtain reasonable        services criteria. We
                        subject          assurance about          believe that the
                        matter is        whether, in all          evidence we obtained is
                        in accor-        material respects,       sufficient and
                        dance            the description          appropriate to provide a
                        with (or         presents the system      reasonable basis for our
                        based on)        that was designed        opinion.
                        the              and implemented
                        criteria,        throughout the
                        in all           period in accordance
                        material         with the description
                        respects         criteria and the
                        (or equiv-       controls stated
                        alent            therein were
                        language         suitably designed
                        regard-          and operated
                        ing the          effectively to provide
                        subject          reasonable
                        matter           assurance



AAG-SOP 4.35                                                             ©2022, AICPA
       Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report                   195
    Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

 Reference
  to AT-C
Section 205
 Require-
 ment on       AT-C Section
Which the          205
   SOC 2       Requirements
Reporting      and Relevant            SOC 2 Reporting           Illustrative Service
Element Is      Application             Elements and               Auditor’s Type 2
   Based         Guidance            Additional Guidance          Report Language
                       and              that the service
                       criteria,        organization's
                       such as          service commitments
                       the              and system
                       language         requirements were
                       used in          achieved based on
                       the              the applicable trust
                       examples         services criteria.
                       in para-      3. The service auditor
                       graph            believes the evidence
                       .A90 of          obtained is sufficient
                       AT-C             and appropriate to
                       section          provide a reasonable
                       205) or          basis for the opinion.
                  (2) the re-
                        sponsible
                        party's
                        assertion
                        is fairly
                        stated, in
                        all
                        material
                        respects
              ii. the
                  practitioner
                  believes the
                  evidence the
                  practitioner
                  obtained is
                  sufficient and
                  appropriate to
                  provide a
                  reasonable
                  basis for the
                  practitioner's
                  opinion

                                                                           (continued)




©2022, AICPA                                                             AAG-SOP 4.35
196   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

        Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on       AT-C Section
   Which the          205
      SOC 2       Requirements
   Reporting      and Relevant        SOC 2 Reporting              Illustrative Service
   Element Is      Application         Elements and                  Auditor’s Type 2
      Based         Guidance        Additional Guidance             Report Language
   par. .63h     A description of   In describing the nature   An examination of the
                 the nature of an   of a SOC 2 examination,    description of a service
                 assertion-based    the service auditor        organization's system
                 examination        generally indicates that   and the suitability of
                 engagement         a SOC 2 examination        the design and
                                    includes the following:    operating effectiveness
                                    1. Obtaining an            of controls involves the
                                       understanding of the    following:
                                       system and the          • Obtaining an
                                       service                      understanding of the
                                       organization's               system and the
                                       service commitments          service organization's
                                       and system                   service commitments
                                       requirements                 and system
                                    2. Assessing the risks          requirements
                                       that the description    • Assessing the risks
                                       of the service               that the description
                                       organization's               is not presented in
                                       system is not                accordance with the
                                       presented in                 description criteria
                                       accordance with the          and that controls
                                       description criteria         were not suitably
                                       and that the controls        designed or did not
                                       were not suitably            operate effectively
                                       designed or did not     •    Performing
                                       operate effectively          procedures to obtain
                                    3. Performing                   evidence about
                                       procedures to obtain         whether the
                                       evidence about               description is
                                       whether the                  presented in
                                       description is               accordance with the
                                       presented in                 description criteria
                                       accordance with the     • Performing
                                       description criteria         procedures to obtain
                                    4. Performing                   evidence about
                                       procedures to obtain         whether controls
                                       evidence about               stated in the
                                       whether the controls         description were
                                       stated in the                suitably designed to
                                       description were             provide reasonable
                                       suitably designed to         assurance that the
                                       provide reasonable           service organization




AAG-SOP 4.35                                                            ©2022, AICPA
       Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report            197
    Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

 Reference
  to AT-C
Section 205
 Require-
 ment on      AT-C Section
Which the         205
   SOC 2      Requirements
Reporting     and Relevant       SOC 2 Reporting          Illustrative Service
Element Is     Application        Elements and              Auditor’s Type 2
   Based        Guidance       Additional Guidance         Report Language
                                  assurance that the        achieved its service
                                  service organization      commitments and
                                  achieved its service      system requirements
                                  commitments and           based on the
                                  system requirements       applicable trust
                                  based on the              services criteria
                                  applicable trust       •  Testing the operating
                                  services criteria         effectiveness of
                              5. Testing the                controls stated in the
                                  operating                 description to provide
                                  effectiveness of          reasonable assurance
                                  controls stated in the    that the service
                                  description to            organization
                                  provide reasonable        achieved its service
                                  assurance that the        commitments and
                                  service organization      system requirements
                                  achieved its service      based on the
                                  commitments and           applicable trust
                                  system requirements       services criteria
                                  based on the           •  Evaluating the
                                  applicable trust          overall presentation
                                  services criteria         of the description
                              6. Evaluating the
                                                         Our examination also
                                  overall presentation
                                                         included performing
                                  of the description
                                                         such other procedures
                              In addition, the service   as we considered
                              auditor may indicate       necessary in the
                              that the examination       circumstances.
                              also included
                              performing other
                              procedures the service
                              auditor considered
                              necessary in the
                              circumstances.

                                                                     (continued)




©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 4.35
198   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

         Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on       AT-C Section
   Which the          205
      SOC 2       Requirements
   Reporting      and Relevant         SOC 2 Reporting          Illustrative Service
   Element Is      Application          Elements and              Auditor’s Type 2
      Based         Guidance         Additional Guidance         Report Language
   par. .63i     A statement that    The service auditor's     We are required to be
                 the practitioner    report should include a   independent and to
                 is required to be   statement that the        meet our other ethical
                 independent and     service auditor is        responsibilities in
                 to meet the         required to be            accordance with
                 practitioner's      independent and to        relevant ethical
                 other ethical       meet the service          requirements relating
                 responsibilities    auditor's other ethical   to the engagement.
                 in accordance       responsibilities in
                 with relevant       accordance with
                 ethical             relevant ethical
                 requirements        requirements related to
                 related to the      the examination
                 examination         engagement.
                 engagement
   par. .63j     A statement that    Because controls can      Inherent Limitations
                 describes           only provide reasonable   The description is
                 significant         assurance that service    prepared to meet the
                 inherent            commitments and           common needs of a
                 limitations, if     system requirements       broad range of users
                 any, associated     are achieved, the         and may not, therefore,
                 with the            service auditor should    include every aspect of
                 measurement or      consider including in     the system that
                 evaluation of the   the report statements     individual users may
                 subject matter      such as the following:    consider important to
                 against the
                 criteria
                                     • A description is        meet their
                                       prepared to meet the    informational needs.
                                       common needs of a       There are inherent
                                       broad range of report   limitations in the
                                       users and may not,      effectiveness of any
                                       therefore, include      system of internal
                                       every aspect of the     control, including the
                                       system that             possibility of human
                                       individual users may    error and the
                                       consider important to   circumvention of
                                       meet their              controls.
                                       informational needs.




AAG-SOP 4.35                                                          ©2022, AICPA
       Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report             199
    Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

 Reference
  to AT-C
Section 205
 Require-
 ment on      AT-C Section
Which the         205
   SOC 2      Requirements
Reporting     and Relevant       SOC 2 Reporting           Illustrative Service
Element Is     Application        Elements and               Auditor’s Type 2
   Based        Guidance       Additional Guidance          Report Language
                              • There are inherent        Because of their nature,
                                 limitations in the       controls may not always
                                 effectiveness of any     operate effectively to
                                 system of internal       provide reasonable
                                 control, including the   assurance that the
                                 possibility of human     service organization's
                                 error and the            service commitments
                                 circumvention of         and system
                                 controls.                requirements are
                              • Because of their          achieved based on the
                                 nature, controls may     applicable trust services
                                 not always operate       criteria. Also, the
                                 effectively to provide   projection to the future
                                 reasonable assurance     of any conclusions about
                                 that the service         the suitability of the
                                 organization's service   design and operating
                                 commitments and          effectiveness of controls
                                 system requirements      is subject to the risks
                                 were achieved based      that controls may
                                 on the applicable        become inadequate
                                 trust services           because of changes in
                                 criteria. Also,          conditions or that the
                                 projection to the        degree of compliance
                                 future of any            with the policies or
                                 conclusions about the    procedures may
                                 suitability of the       deteriorate.
                                 design or operating
                                 effectiveness of
                                 controls is subject to
                                 the risks that
                                 controls may become
                                 inadequate because
                                 of changes in
                                 conditions or that the
                                 degree of compliance
                                 with the policies or
                                 procedures may
                                 deteriorate.

                                                                      (continued)




©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP 4.35
200   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

            Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on            AT-C Section
   Which the               205
      SOC 2            Requirements
   Reporting           and Relevant           SOC 2 Reporting              Illustrative Service
   Element Is           Application            Elements and                  Auditor’s Type 2
      Based              Guidance           Additional Guidance             Report Language
   par. .A93          A practitioner        The SOC 2 report             Description of Tests of
                      may be requested      described in this guide      Controls
                      to provide, in a      includes a description of    The specific controls we
                      separate section      the procedures               tested and the nature,
                      of the                performed and the            timing, and results of
                      practitioner's        results of those             those tests are listed in
                      report, a             procedures in the            section XX.10
                      description of the    report. For that reason,
                      procedures            as discussed beginning
                      performed and         in paragraph 4.36, the
                      the results           SOC 2 report is
                      thereof in            restricted to parties
                      support of the        who are likely to
                      practitioner's        understand the report.
                      opinion.              The elements of the
                      The addition of       service auditor's
                      procedures            description of
                      performed and         procedures performed
                      the results           and results thereof are
                      thereof in a          discussed beginning in
                      separate section      paragraph 4.18. [Not
                      of an                 illustrated in the
                      assertion-based       right-hand column]
                      examination
                      report may
                      increase the
                      potential for the
                      report to be
                      misunderstood
                      when taken out
                      of the context of
                      the knowledge of
                      the requesting
                      parties. This
                      potential for an
                      increase in the
                      risk of misunder-
                      standing may
                      lead the
                      practitioner to
                      add a
                      restricted-use
                      paragraph to the
                      practitioner's
                      report.


      10    The illustrative description on the AICPA website includes additional language that may be
  useful.


AAG-SOP 4.35                                                                     ©2022, AICPA
            Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report                 201
     Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

 Reference
  to AT-C
Section 205
 Require-
 ment on          AT-C Section
Which the             205
   SOC 2          Requirements
Reporting         and Relevant         SOC 2 Reporting            Illustrative Service
Element Is         Application          Elements and                Auditor’s Type 2
   Based            Guidance         Additional Guidance           Report Language
par. .63k        The                 The service auditor's       Opinion
                 practitioner's      opinion should be           In our opinion, in all
                 opinion about       expressed in a              material respects,
                 whether the         statement about
                 subject matter is   whether, in all material    a. the description
                 in accordance       respects,                      presents XYZ's
                 with (or based                                     [name or type]
                                     1. the description of the      system that was
                 on) the criteria,      service
                 in all material                                    designed and
                                        organization's              implemented
                 respects               system presents the         throughout the
                                        system that was             period [date] to
                                        designed and                [date] in accordance
                                        implemented                 with the description
                                        throughout the              criteria.
                                        specified period in
                                                                 b. the controls stated in
                                        accordance with the
                                                                    the description were
                                        description criteria.
                                                                    suitably designed
                                     2. the controls stated in      throughout the
                                        the description were        period [date] to
                                        suitably designed           [date] to provide
                                        throughout the              reasonable
                                        specified period to         assurance that XYZ's
                                        provide reasonable          service commitments
                                        assurance that the          and system
                                        service organization        requirements would
                                        would achieve its           be achieved based on
                                        service commitments         the applicable trust
                                        and system                  services criteria if its
                                        requirements based          controls operated
                                        on the applicable           effectively
                                        trust services              throughout that
                                        criteria if the             period and if the
                                        controls operated           subservice
                                        effectively                 organization and
                                        throughout the              user entities
                                        specified period.           applied the

                                                                              (continued)




©2022, AICPA                                                                 AAG-SOP 4.35
202   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

        Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on      AT-C Section
   Which the         205
      SOC 2      Requirements
   Reporting     and Relevant        SOC 2 Reporting            Illustrative Service
   Element Is     Application         Elements and                Auditor’s Type 2
      Based        Guidance        Additional Guidance           Report Language
                                   3. the controls stated in      complementary
                                      the description             controls assumed
                                      operated effectively        in the design of
                                      throughout the              XYZ’s controls
                                      specified period to         throughout that
                                      provide reasonable          period.
                                      assurance that the       c. the controls stated in
                                      service organization        the description
                                      achieved its service        operated effectively
                                      commitments and             throughout the
                                      system requirements         period [date] to
                                      based on the                [date] to provide
                                      applicable trust            reasonable
                                      services criteria.          assurance that XYZ's
                                  If the application of           service commitments
                                  CUECs or CSOCs is               and system
                                  necessary, in                   requirements were
                                  combination with                achieved based on
                                  controls at the service         the applicable trust
                                  organization, to provide        services criteria if
                                  reasonable assurance            complementary
                                  that the service                subservice
                                  organization's service          organization
                                  commitments and                 controls and
                                  system requirements             complementary
                                  were achieved based on          user entity
                                  the applicable trust            controls assumed
                                  services criteria, the          in the design of
                                  service auditor should          XYZ’s controls
                                  include a statement to          operated
                                  that effect in the report       effectively
                                  to prevent report users         throughout that
                                  from misunderstanding           period.
                                  the limitations of the
                                  service auditor's
                                  opinion. See the
                                  discussion of CSOCs
                                  beginning in paragraph
                                  2.20 and the discussion
                                  of CUECs beginning in
                                  paragraph 2.23.




AAG-SOP 4.35                                                         ©2022, AICPA
            Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report               203
      Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

 Reference
  to AT-C
Section 205
 Require-
 ment on          AT-C Section
Which the             205
   SOC 2          Requirements
Reporting         and Relevant          SOC 2 Reporting           Illustrative Service
Element Is         Application           Elements and               Auditor’s Type 2
   Based            Guidance          Additional Guidance          Report Language
par. .64a        The                  The service auditor's      Restricted Use
par. .65         practitioner's       report is usually          This report, including
                 report should        restricted to those        the description of tests
                 include an alert,    parties who have           of controls and results
                 in a separate        sufficient knowledge       thereof in section XX, is
                 paragraph, that      and understanding of       intended solely for the
                 restricts the use    particular matters         information and use of
                 of the report if     relevant to the service    XYZ, user entities of
                 the practitioner     organization and service   XYZ's [type or name]
                 determines that      auditor's examination.     system during some or
                 the criteria used    Accordingly, the report    all of the period [date]
                 to evaluate the      should include an alert    to [date], business
                 subject matter       that does the following:   partners of XYZ subject
                 are appropriate      1. States that the         to risks arising from
                 only for a limited      service auditor's       interactions with the
                 number of               report, including the [type or name] system,
                 parties who             description of tests of practitioners providing
                 either                  controls and results, services to such user
                 participated in         is intended solely for entities and business
                 their                   the information and     partners, prospective
                 establishment or        use of the specified    user entities and
                 can be presumed         parties.                business partners, and
                 to have an                                      regulators who have
                                      2. Identifies the
                 adequate                                        sufficient knowledge
                 understanding of        specified parties for
                                         whom use is             and understanding of
                 the criteria.                                   the following:
                                         intended. Often the
                 The alert should        specified parties will a. The nature of the
                  a. state that the      be prospective user         service provided by
                     practitioner's      entities and business       the service
                     report is           partners of the             organization
                     intended            service organization    b. How the service
                     solely for the      and practitioners           organization's
                     information         engaged by a user           system interacts
                     and use of the      entity or business          with user entities,
                     specified           partner when the            business partners,
                     parties,            SOC 2 report is             subservice

                                                                              (continued)




©2022, AICPA                                                                AAG-SOP 4.35
204   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

        Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on      AT-C Section
   Which the         205
      SOC 2      Requirements
   Reporting     and Relevant          SOC 2 Reporting           Illustrative Service
   Element Is     Application           Elements and               Auditor’s Type 2
      Based        Guidance          Additional Guidance          Report Language
                 b. identify the        intended to provide        organizations, and
                    specified           evidence to the            other parties
                    parties for         practitioner            c. Internal control and
                    whom use is         regarding controls         its limitations
                    intended, and       operated by the
                                                               d. Complementary
                 c. state that the      service organization.
                                                                   user entity
                    report is not    3. When others, such as       controls and
                    intended to be      regulators, are            complementary
                    and should          intended users, their      subservice
                    not be used by      use of the report is       organization
                    anyone other        likely to be               controls and how
                    than the            appropriate only           those controls
                    specified           when they have             interact with the
                    parties.            sufficient knowledge       controls at the
                                        and understanding          service
                                        of the following:          organization to
                                          a. The nature of         achieve the service
                                              the service          organization’s
                                              provided by the      service
                                              service              commitments and
                                              organization         system
                                          b. How the service       requirements
                                              organization's    e. User entity
                                              system               responsibilities and
                                              interacts with       how they may affect
                                              user entities,       the user entity's
                                              business             ability to effectively
                                              partners,            use the service
                                              subservice           organization's
                                              organizations,       services
                                              and other         f. The applicable trust
                                              parties              services criteria
                                          c. Internal control g. The risks that may
                                              and its              threaten the
                                              limitations          achievement of the
                                         d. User entity            service
                                              responsibilities     organization's
                                              and how they         service commitments
                                              may affect the       and system
                                              user entity's        requirements, and
                                              ability to           how controls address
                                              effectively use      those risks
                                              the service      This report is not
                                              organization's   intended to be, and
                                              services




AAG-SOP 4.35                                                           ©2022, AICPA
       Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report            205
    Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued

 Reference
  to AT-C
Section 205
 Require-
 ment on      AT-C Section
Which the         205
   SOC 2      Requirements
Reporting     and Relevant       SOC 2 Reporting          Illustrative Service
Element Is     Application        Elements and              Auditor’s Type 2
   Based        Guidance       Additional Guidance         Report Language
                                   e. The applicable     should not be, used by
                                      trust services     anyone other than these
                                      criteria           specified parties.
                                   f. The risks that
                                      may threaten
                                      the
                                      achievement of
                                      the service
                                      organization's
                                      service
                                      commitments
                                      and system
                                      requirements,
                                      and how
                                      controls address
                                      those risks
                                 When there are
                                 CUECs and CSOCs,
                                 the following
                                 additional bullet
                                 may also be added to
                                 this list:
                                  g. CUECs and
                                       CSOCs and how
                                       those controls
                                       interact with
                                       the controls at
                                       the service
                                       organization to
                                       achieve the
                                       service
                                       organization's
                                       service
                                       commitments
                                       and system
                                       requirements

                                                                    (continued)




©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 4.35
206   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

         Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued
    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on       AT-C Section
   Which the          205
      SOC 2       Requirements
   Reporting      and Relevant         SOC 2 Reporting             Illustrative Service
   Element Is      Application          Elements and                 Auditor’s Type 2
      Based         Guidance         Additional Guidance            Report Language
                                     At the service auditor's
                                     discretion, the specified
                                     parties may be
                                     specifically identified in
                                     the report. The intended
                                     users of a SOC 2 report
                                     are discussed beginning
                                     in paragraph 1.07.
                                     In addition, the report
                                     should include a
                                     statement that the
                                     report is not intended to
                                     be and should not be
                                     used by anyone other
                                     than the specified
                                     parties.
   par. .63l     The manual or       The service auditor's        Service auditor's
                 printed signature   report should include        signature
                 of the              the manual or printed
                 practitioner's      signature of the service
                 firm                auditor's firm.
   par. .63m     The city and        The service auditor's        City and state where the
                 state where the     report should include        report is issued
                 practitioner's      the city and state where
                 report is issued    the service auditor's
                                     report is issued.
   par. .63n     The date of the     The service auditor       Date of the service
                 report (The         should date the report    auditor's report
                 report should be    no earlier than the date
                 dated no earlier    on which the service
                 than the date on    auditor has obtained
                 which the           sufficient appropriate
                 practitioner has    evidence to support the
                 obtained            opinion, including
                 sufficient          evidence that
                 appropriate         1. the attestation
                 evidence on            documentation has
                 which to base the      been reviewed,
                 practitioner's
                 opinion,            2. the description of the
                 including              service
                 evidence that          organization's
                                        system has been
                 a. the                 prepared, and
                    attestation
                    documenta-       3. service organization
                    tion has been       management has
                    reviewed;           provided a written
                                        assertion.




AAG-SOP 4.35                                                            ©2022, AICPA
         Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report           207
      Elements of a Service Auditor's Type 2 Report — continued
  Reference
   to AT-C
 Section 205
  Require-
  ment on       AT-C Section
 Which the            205
    SOC 2       Requirements
 Reporting      and Relevant         SOC 2 Reporting       Illustrative Service
 Element Is      Application          Elements and           Auditor’s Type 2
    Based         Guidance         Additional Guidance      Report Language
               b. if applicable,
                  the written
                  presentation
                  of the subject
                  matter has
                  been
                  prepared; and
               c. the
                  responsible
                  party has
                  provided a
                  written
                  assertion or,
                  in the
                  circumstances
                  described in
                  paragraph
                  .A72 of AT-C
                  section 205,
                  an oral
                  assertion.)

Requirement to Restrict the Use of the SOC 2 Report
     4.36 A SOC 2 report, as described in this guide, is intended to include a
description of the procedures performed by the service auditor and the results
of those procedures. According to paragraph .A93 of AT-C section 205, the ad-
dition of procedures performed and the results thereof in a separate section
of an examination report may increase the potential for that report to be mis-
understood when taken out of the context of the knowledge of the requesting
parties. For that reason, the service auditor's report includes an alert restrict-
ing it to those intended users who are likely to understand it. As discussed in
chapter 1, the SOC 2 report has been designed to meet the common information
needs of the broad range of potential SOC 2 users. (Table 4-3 also identifies the
broad range of specified parties to whom the service auditor's report is ordinar-
ily restricted.) However, nothing precludes the service auditor from restricting
the use of the service auditor's report to a smaller group of users.
    4.37 Table 4-3 presents the requirements for an alert paragraph from
paragraph .65 of AT-C section 205. The service auditor's report should include
each of those elements in the alert paragraph.

Reporting When the Service Organization’s Design of Controls
Assumes Complementary User Entity Controls
    4.38 AT-C section 205 does not address the need for additional language
in certain situations unique to a SOC 2 examination that may affect report
users' understanding of the subject matter and the examination. One of those
situations occurs when service organization management assumes, during the

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 4.38
208   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  design of the service organization's system controls, that user entities would ap-
  ply certain controls. Such controls, known as CUECs, must be suitably designed
  and operating effectively for the service organization to achieve its service com-
  mitments and system requirements.
       4.39 If there are CUECs, description criterion DC6 requires that fact be
  disclosed in the description of the service organization's system. Because the
  service auditor does not examine the controls implemented at user entities,
  disclosure of that information in the service auditor's report is necessary to
  inform report users about that limitation on the examination. In addition, the
  service auditor's report would generally include a statement that the service au-
  ditor has not evaluated the suitability of the design or operating effectiveness
  of CUECs and that the service organization can achieve its service commit-
  ments and system requirements based on the applicable trust services criteria
  stated in the description only if CUECs are suitably designed and operating
  effectively, along with the related controls at the service organization. Further-
  more, the service auditor may wish to include in the restricted-use paragraph
  the need for specified users to have sufficient knowledge and understanding of
  the CUECs and how those controls interact with the controls at the service or-
  ganization to achieve the service organization's service commitments and sys-
  tem requirements. Illustrative language related to CUECs is shown in boldface
  italics in table 4-3.
       4.40 Service organization management would also modify its assertion to
  reflect the modifications to the service auditor's report discussed in the preced-
  ing paragraph. The illustrative report in appendix C-1 contains language that
  may be useful.

  Reporting When the Service Organization Carves Out the
  Controls at a Subservice Organization
       4.41 Another situation that affects the subject matter of the SOC 2 exam-
  ination occurs when a service organization uses a subservice organization and
  service organization management assumes, in the design of the service organi-
  zation's system, that the subservice organization would apply certain controls.
  Such controls, known as CSOCs, must be suitably designed and operating ef-
  fectively for the service organization to achieve its service commitments and
  system requirements.
      4.42 When using the carve-out method, description criterion DC7 requires
  service organization management to include in the description certain disclo-
  sures about the use of a subservice organization, including the services pro-
  vided by the subservice organization and the types of CSOCs it is expected to
  perform. DC7 also requires disclosure of the types of complementary controls
  that are assumed to be suitably designed and operated effectively at the sub-
  service organization. The description also needs to disclose controls designed
  to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service com-
  mitments and system requirements are achieved, which include controls that
  the service organization uses to monitor the services provided by the subservice
  organization.
      4.43 To inform report users about the potential effect of CSOCs, the ser-
  vice auditor's report would generally contain similar disclosures as those de-
  scribed in the preceding paragraph. In addition, it would generally contain
  a statement that the service auditor has not evaluated the suitability of the

AAG-SOP 4.39                                                      ©2022, AICPA
         Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report         209
design or operating effectiveness of CSOCs and that the service organization
can achieve its service commitments and system requirements based on the
applicable trust services criteria stated in the description only if CSOCs are
suitably designed and operating effectively, along with the related controls at
the service organization. Furthermore, the service auditor may wish to include
in the restricted-use paragraph the need for specified users to have sufficient
knowledge and understanding of the CSOCs and how those controls interact
with the controls at the service organization to achieve the service organiza-
tion's service commitments and system requirements. Illustrative language re-
lated to CSOCs is shown in boldface italics in table 4-3. The illustrative report
on the AICPA website contains language that may be useful.
    4.44 There may be circumstances in which more detailed information
about the specific controls at the subservice organization is necessary to meet
the needs of individual users. For example, additional information may be nec-
essary if a service organization has outsourced all of its IT infrastructure to a
cloud service provider. To inform users that this information may be available in
a SOC 2 report of the subservice organization, the service auditor may consider
adding additional language, such as the following, to the inherent limitations
paragraph of the service auditor's report:
         The description is prepared to meet the common needs of a broad range
         of report users and may not, therefore, include every aspect of the sys-
         tem that individual users may consider important to meet their infor-
         mational needs. If individual users determine that detailed infor-
         mation about the actual controls at the subservice organization
         is necessary to meet those needs, they may request from service
         organization management the subservice organization’s SOC 2
         report, if available.

Expanded Reporting
    4.45 Paragraph .A83 of AT-C section 205 notes that the service auditor
may choose to issue a report that contains only the required reporting elements
described in table 4-3 or may issue a report that expands on or supplements
those elements. A description of procedures performed and results of those pro-
cedures, described as additional reporting elements in paragraph .A83 of AT-C
section 205, are expected disclosures in a SOC 2 service auditor's report. The
report may also contain information or explanations that are not intended to
affect the service auditor's opinion but that may be helpful to users' understand-
ing of the SOC examination. Examples of such explanations include additional
details about the terms of the engagement, details of the qualifications and ex-
perience of the service auditor and others involved with the engagement, or
recommendations to management. In accordance with paragraph .82 of AT-C
section 205, such information should be clearly separated from the service au-
ditor's opinion and phrased in a manner that makes clear that it is not intended
to detract from the opinion.


Reporting When the Service Auditor Assumes
Responsibility for the Work of an Other Practitioner
    4.46 When the service auditor assumes responsibility for the work of an
other practitioner, the description of tests of controls and results prepared by
the other practitioner would be included in the section of the service auditor's

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 4.46
210   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  report that includes such information. However, because the service auditor
  takes responsibility for the work of the other practitioner, the service auditor
  does not refer to the other practitioner in the service auditor's report.


  Modiﬁcations to the Service Auditor’s Report
       4.47 In accordance with paragraph .70 of AT-C section 205, the service
  auditor should modify the opinion when either of the following circumstances
  exist and, in the service auditor's professional judgment, the effect of the matter
  is or may be material:
          a. The service auditor is unable to obtain sufficient appropriate evi-
             dence to conclude that the subject matter is presented in accordance
             with (or based on) the criteria, in all material respects.
          b. The service auditor concludes, based on evidence obtained, that the
             subject matter is not presented in accordance with (or based on) the
             criteria, in all material respects.
      4.48 In applying paragraphs .70–.71 of AT-C section 205 to the SOC 2
  examination, the service auditor's opinion should be modified and the service
  auditor's report should include a description of the matters giving rise to the
  modification if any of the following apply:
          a. The service auditor concludes that the description does not present
             the system designed and implemented throughout the period in ac-
             cordance with the description criteria, in all material respects.
          b. The service auditor concludes that the controls are not suitably
             designed to provide reasonable assurance that the service organi-
             zation's service commitments and system requirements would be
             achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria if the con-
             trols operated effectively, in all material respects.
           c. The service auditor concludes that the controls did not operate ef-
              fectively throughout the specified period to provide reasonable as-
              surance that the service organization's service commitments and
              system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust
              services criteria, in all material respects.
          d. The service auditor is unable to obtain sufficient appropriate evi-
             dence.
       4.49 The objective of including a description of each of the matters giving
  rise to the modification is to enable report users to consider the effects of identi-
  fied description misstatements, deficiencies, and deviations when making their
  own risk assessments. Materiality considerations related to the description are
  discussed beginning in paragraph 3.84, and considerations related to the suit-
  ability of design and operating effectiveness of controls are discussed beginning
  in paragraph 3.186.
       4.50 If a modified opinion is appropriate, the service auditor determines
  whether to issue a qualified opinion, an adverse opinion, or a disclaimer of opin-
  ion. As indicated in paragraph .A113 of AT-C section 205, the decision regarding
  which type of modified opinion is appropriate depends on the following:
          a. The nature of the matter giving rise to the modification (that is,
             whether the subject matter of the engagement is presented in ac-
             cordance with [or based on] the criteria, in all material respects, or

AAG-SOP 4.47                                                         ©2022, AICPA
          Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report                 211
            in the case of an inability to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence,
            may be materially misstated)
         b. The service auditor's professional judgment about the pervasive-
            ness of the effects or possible effects of the matter on the subject
            matter of the engagement
    4.51 When determining the type of modified opinion to be issued, the ser-
vice auditor evaluates whether identified (a) description misstatements (in-
cluding omissions) or (b) deviations in the suitability of the design and oper-
ating effectiveness of the controls are material.
    4.52 Table 4-4 identifies the type of modified opinion to be issued based on
the nature of the matter giving rise to the modification and the service auditor's
professional judgment about the materiality and pervasiveness of its effects (or
possible effects) on the opinion on the description, the suitability of design of
controls, and the operating effectiveness of controls.
Table 4-4
                          Types of Opinion Modifications

                                            Service Auditor’s Professional Judgment
                                            About the Pervasiveness of the Effects (or
                                             Possible Effects) on the Opinion on the
                                              Description, on the Suitability of the
 Nature of Matter Giving Rise to the        Design of Controls, and on the Operating
            Modification                            Effectiveness of Controls
                                             Material but Not        Material and
                                                Pervasive             Pervasive
 Scope limitation. An inability to obtain   Qualified opinion    Disclaimer of opinion
 sufficient appropriate evidence.
 Material misstatements                     Qualified opinion    Adverse opinion
• The description is materially
   misstated.
                   or
• The controls are not suitably
   designed to provide reasonable
   assurance that one or more of the
   service organization's service
   commitments or system
   requirements were achieved based
   on the applicable trust services
   criteria.
                   or
• The controls are not operating
   effectively to provide reasonable
   assurance that one or more of the
   service organization's service
   commitments or system
   requirements were achieved based
   on the applicable trust services
   criteria.


    4.53 In accordance with paragraph .71 of AT-C section 205, when the ser-
vice auditor modifies the opinion, a separate paragraph should be included in
the service auditor's report that provides a description of the matters giving

©2022, AICPA                                                              AAG-SOP 4.53
212   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  rise to the modification. Examples of separate paragraphs that describe the
  matters giving rise to a modification are provided beginning in paragraph 4.75.
       4.54 When determining whether to modify the service auditor's report,
  the service auditor considers the effect of identified misstatements, individu-
  ally and in the aggregate, on the description of the service organization's sys-
  tem taken as a whole. The service auditor also considers the effect of identified
  deficiencies on the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of the
  controls to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service
  commitments and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable
  trust services criteria throughout the specified period. Chapter 3 discusses ma-
  teriality, including the quantitative and qualitative factors the service auditor
  considers, in further detail.

  Qualiﬁed Opinion
      4.55 The service auditor expresses a qualified opinion in the following
  circumstances:

          • The service auditor, having obtained sufficient appropriate evi-
            dence, concludes that description misstatements, either individ-
               ually or in the aggregate, are material but not pervasive or defi-
               ciencies in the design or operation of controls are material but not
               pervasive.
          •    The service auditor is unable to obtain sufficient appropriate ev-
               idence on which to base the opinion but the service auditor has
               concluded that the possible effects on the subject matter of unde-
               tected description misstatements or deficiencies, if any, could be
               material but not pervasive to the subject matter.
  This section discusses qualifications because of material description misstate-
  ments. The section beginning in paragraph 4.63 discusses qualifications be-
  cause of scope limitations.
      4.56 When the service auditor has determined that a qualified opinion is
  appropriate because of material description misstatements or deficiencies, the
  service auditor's report would be modified by doing the following:

          • Including, in a separate paragraph before the opinion paragraph,
            a clear explanation of the matters giving rise to the qualified opin-
               ion. When the modification is due to a deficiency in control effec-
               tiveness, the service auditor usually identifies the effect of the de-
               ficiency on the service organization's ability to achieve one or more
               service commitments and system requirements.
          •    Stating in the opinion paragraph that, except for the effects of the
               matters giving rise to the modification, the description is presented
               in accordance with the description criteria and the controls were
               suitably designed and operating effectively to provide reasonable
               assurance that the service organization's service commitments
               and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable
               trust services criteria, in all material respects.
          •    Amending the service auditor's responsibility paragraph to state
               that the service auditor believes that the evidence the service au-
               ditor has obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis
               for the service auditor's qualified opinion.

AAG-SOP 4.54                                                       ©2022, AICPA
         Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report         213
Adverse Opinion
     4.57 Paragraph .74 of AT-C section 205 indicates that a service auditor
should issue an adverse opinion when the service auditor concludes that de-
scription misstatements, either individually or in the aggregate, are material
and pervasive or deficiencies in the design or operation of controls are material
and pervasive. Generally, the service auditor would express an adverse opinion
in a SOC 2 examination if the description misstatements in the description of
the service organization's system or deficiencies in the suitability of the design
or operating effectiveness of the controls are material and pervasive throughout
the description or prevent the achievement of all or most of the service organi-
zation's service commitments and system requirements based on the applicable
trust services criteria.
     4.58 When determining whether a material description misstatement or
deficiency is likely to have a pervasive effect on the description based on the
description criteria or on the achievement of the service organization's service
commitments and system requirements based on the applicable trust services
criteria, paragraph .A115 of AT-C section 205 notes that the term pervasive
describes the effects on the subject matter of misstatements or the possible
effects on the subject matter of misstatements, if any, that are undetected due
to an inability to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence. Based on that guidance,
pervasive effects in a SOC 2 examination are those that, in the service auditor's
professional judgment, are
        a. not confined to only specific aspects of the description or to the con-
           clusion about the suitability of design and, in a type 2 examination,
           the operating effectiveness of controls;
        b. if so confined, represent or could represent a substantial proportion
           of the description or conclusions about suitability of design and, in
           a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness of controls; or
        c. in relation to disclosures, are fundamental to the intended users'
           understanding of the description or conclusion about the suitability
           of design and, in a type 2 examination, the operating effectiveness
           of controls.

     4.59 When determining whether a material description misstatement is
pervasive, the service auditor may consider the significance of the description
criteria that were not met as a result of the misstatement to the description
taken as a whole. Such determination may assist the service auditor in eval-
uating whether the misstatement is isolated to a single aspect of the descrip-
tion or whether it affects a significant portion of the description. For example,
management's omission of the use of a subservice organization may affect not
only the disclosures required in DC7 regarding subservice organizations, but
also disclosures related to the applicable trust services criteria and controls
required by DC5. Because a significant portion of the description is affected,
the service auditor may conclude that the material description misstatement
is pervasive.
    4.60 Similarly, when determining if a material deficiency is pervasive, the
service auditor may consider the significance of the trust services criteria that
were not met as a result of the deficiency to the achievement of the service
commitments and system requirements taken as a whole. Such determination
may assist the service auditor in evaluating whether the deficiency is isolated

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP 4.60
214   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  to a single aspect of the system or if it affects multiple aspects. As an exam-
  ple, assume a service organization uses password vaulting to restrict access
  to accounts with system administrator authorities and to document the users
  who access those administrative accounts. When performing procedures in the
  SOC 2 engagement addressing security, confidentiality, and privacy, the service
  auditor identified the following control deviations:

          • The vaulted administrative accounts were frequently accessed by
            someone using the user ID of a terminated employee.
          • The user ID of the terminated employee was used to access ad-
            ministrative accounts frequently and for long periods of time. The
               use of the terminated employee account originated from outside
               the boundaries of the service organization's network.
          •    The administrative account was used to edit system logs to remove
               tracking of administrative account activities prior to returning ad-
               ministrative control to the vaulting software.
          •    The system logs did not include evidence of the tampering with
               the log.
  After considering the effect of these deficiencies on the achievement of the ser-
  vice organization's service commitments related to logical access, change man-
  agement, and other system requirements, the service auditor determined that
  the material deficiencies were pervasive because of their effect on IT infrastruc-
  ture integrity, access to data, and change management controls, all of which are
  critical to the achievement of the service organization's service commitments
  and system requirements. Accordingly, the service auditor issued an adverse
  opinion on control effectiveness.
      4.61 Other factors that the service auditor may consider when deter-
  mining whether identified material deficiencies have a pervasive effect on the
  achievement of the service organization's service commitments and system re-
  quirements include the following:

          • The effect that entity-level controls have on the operation of other
            controls. Deficiencies in entity-level controls often have a perva-
               sive effect on the operation of other controls, which may affect the
               ability of controls to provide reasonable assurance of achieving the
               service organization's service commitments and system require-
               ments.
          •    The extent of the use of segmentation across the service organiza-
               tion's networks and systems. The greater the use of segmentation,
               the less likely it is that deficiencies in the operation of controls in
               one system will have an effect on the operation of controls in an-
               other one.
       4.62 When the service auditor determines that it is appropriate to ex-
  presses an adverse opinion on the description, the suitability of design, or the
  operating effectiveness of controls, it would not be appropriate to issue an opin-
  ion other than an adverse opinion on the other subject matters. When express-
  ing an adverse opinion, the service auditor should add a separate paragraph to
  the service auditor's report in accordance with paragraph .71 of AT-C section
  205 describing the matters giving rise to the modification and should modify
  the opinion paragraph of the service auditor's report in accordance with para-
  graph .75 of AT-C section 205. In the following example, changes to the opinion

AAG-SOP 4.61                                                        ©2022, AICPA
        Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report         215
paragraph of the service auditor's report are shown in boldface italics; deleted
text is shown in strikethrough.
        In our opinion, because of the significance of the matter(s) re-
        ferred to in the preceding paragraph, in all material respects,
                 a. the description of the [name or type] system does not
                    present the system that was designed and implemented
                    throughout the period [date] to [date] in accordance with
                    the description criteria.
                 b. the controls stated in the description were not suitably
                    designed throughout the period [date] to [date] to pro-
                    vide reasonable assurance that the service organization's
                    service commitments and system requirements would be
                    achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria,
                 c. the controls stated in the description did not operate effec-
                    tively throughout the period [date] to [date] to provide rea-
                    sonable assurance that the service organization's service
                    commitments and system requirements were achieved
                    based on the applicable trust services criteria.
In addition, the last sentence of the service auditor's report should be modi-
fied in accordance with paragraph .79 of AT-C section 205 to indicate that the
evidence obtained is appropriate for the modified opinion expressed, as follows:
        We believe that the evidence we obtained is sufficient and appropriate
        to provide a reasonable basis for our adverse opinion.

Scope Limitation
    4.63 A service auditor may express an unmodified opinion only when the
service auditor has conducted the examination in accordance with the attesta-
tion standards. If the service auditor has been unable to apply all the proce-
dures considered necessary in the circumstances, the service auditor would not
have complied with the attestation standards.
   4.64 According to paragraph .A117 of AT-C section 205, a scope limitation
may arise from any of the following:

        a. Circumstances beyond the control of management. For example, doc-
           uments that the service auditor considers necessary to inspect were
           in the custody of a vendor whose services are no longer in use and
           the documents no longer exist.
        b. Circumstances relating to the nature or timing of the service audi-
           tor's work. For example, a physical process that the service auditor
           considers necessary to observe may have occurred before the service
           auditor's engagement or may not be performed regularly during the
           examination period. (However, an inability to perform a specific pro-
           cedure does not constitute a scope limitation if the service auditor
           is able to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence by performing al-
           ternative procedures.)
        c. Limitations imposed by management (or the engaging party, if dif-
           ferent). For example, management may have imposed a limita-
           tion that prevents the service auditor from performing a procedure

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 4.64
216   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

               that the service auditor considers necessary in the circumstances.
               Limitations of this kind may have other implications for the en-
               gagement, such as for the service auditor's consideration of risks
               of material misstatement and for engagement acceptance and
               continuance.
       4.65 In accordance with paragraph .72 of AT-C section 205, when there is
  a scope limitation, the service auditor should modify the opinion appropriately
  based on the pervasiveness of the effects or possible effects on the description
  and on the suitability of design and operating effectiveness of controls. Accord-
  ing to paragraph .72 of AT-C section 205, the service auditor should express
  a qualified opinion when the service auditor is unable to obtain sufficient ap-
  propriate evidence on which to base the opinion but the service auditor has
  concluded that the possible effects on the subject matter of undetected descrip-
  tion misstatements or deficiencies, if any, could be material but not pervasive
  to the subject matter. (Disclaiming an opinion because of a scope limitation is
  discussed beginning in paragraph 4.68.)
      4.66 When the service auditor has determined that a qualified opinion is
  appropriate because of a limitation in the scope of the examination, the service
  auditor's report would be modified by doing the following:

           • Including,  in a separate paragraph before the opinion paragraph,
             a clear explanation of the matters giving rise to the modification
           • Stating,  in the opinion paragraph, that except for the possible ef-
             fects of the matters giving rise to the modification, the description
                is presented in accordance with the description criteria and the
                controls were suitably designed and operating effectively to pro-
                vide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service
                commitments and system requirements were achieved based on
                the applicable trust services criteria, in all material respects
           •    Amending the service auditor's responsibility paragraph to state
                that the service auditor believes that the evidence obtained is suf-
                ficient and appropriate to provide a basis for the service auditor's
                qualified opinion
       4.67 If the service auditor expresses a qualified opinion because of a scope
  limitation, and also concludes there were material misstatements in the de-
  scription or material deficiencies in the suitability of design or operating effec-
  tiveness of controls, the service auditor should include, in separate paragraphs
  of the report, a clear explanation of both the scope limitation and the matters
  that cause the description, suitability of design, or operating effectiveness of
  controls to be materially misstated in accordance with paragraph .71 of AT-C
  section 205.

  Disclaimer of Opinion
       4.68 In accordance with paragraph .77 of AT-C section 205, the service
  auditor should disclaim an opinion when the service auditor is unable to obtain
  sufficient appropriate evidence on which to base the opinion and the service
  auditor concludes that the possible effects on the subject matters of undetected
  description misstatements, if any, could be both material and pervasive. In such
  circumstances, the service auditor may also reach a mutual agreement with
  the engaging party to terminate the engagement or may withdraw from the
  engagement.

AAG-SOP 4.65                                                       ©2022, AICPA
         Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report           217
     4.69 Paragraph .80 of AT-C section 205 notes the following modifications
to the service auditor's report when disclaiming an opinion:
         • The  first sentence of the service auditor's report should be revised
           to state, "We were engaged to examine" rather than "We have
             examined."
         •   The standards under which the service auditor conducts an ex-
             amination are identified at the end of the second sentence of the
             report, rather than in a separate sentence in the second paragraph
             of the report.
         •   A separate paragraph of the report should state that, because of
             the significance of the matters giving rise to the modification, the
             service auditor has been unable to obtain sufficient appropriate
             evidence to provide a basis for an opinion, and accordingly, the
             service auditor does not express an opinion.
         •   The report should omit statements
                  —    indicating the requirements of AICPA standards for the
                       service auditor.
                  —    describing the nature of an examination engagement or
                       identifying the procedures performed and the results of
                       those procedures.
    4.70 If the service auditor disclaims an opinion and, based on the limited
procedures performed, has concluded that (a) certain aspects of the description
do not present the system designed and implemented in accordance with the
description criteria, (b) certain controls are not suitably designed, or (c) certain
controls did not operate effectively, the service auditor should, in accordance
with paragraph .81 of AT-C section 205, include in the service auditor's report
a separate paragraph containing a clear description of the matters that led the
service auditor to those conclusions.
     4.71 Other situations in which the service auditor should disclaim an opin-
ion include the following, as noted in paragraphs .85–.86 of AT-C section 205:
         • Management    refuses to provide a written assertion (after initially
           agreeing to do so), and law or regulation does not allow the service
             auditor to withdraw from the engagement (see paragraph 4.73).
         •   Management refuses to provide a representation reaffirming its
             written assertion included in or attached to its description or a
             representation stating that it has provided the service auditor
             with all relevant information and access agreed to.
    4.72 Appendix C-3, "Illustrative Service Auditor's Report for a Type 2 Ex-
amination in Which the Service Auditor Disclaims an Opinion Because of a
Scope Limitation," presents an illustrative report that may be used when the
service auditor decides to disclaim an opinion because of a scope limitation due
to management's refusal to provide one or more requested written representa-
tions.

Management Will Not Provide a Written Assertion but Law or
Regulation Does Not Permit the Service Auditor to Withdraw
From the Engagement
   4.73 Paragraph .84 of AT-C section 205 states that, if service organization
management is both the responsible party and the engaging party and refuses

©2022, AICPA                                                          AAG-SOP 4.73
218   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  to provide a written assertion, the service auditor is required to withdraw from
  the engagement. However, if the service auditor is required by law or regulation
  to accept or continue an engagement to report on controls at a service organi-
  zation and management refuses to provide a written assertion, paragraph .85
  of AT-C section 205 indicates that the service auditor may conduct the engage-
  ment and, ultimately, should disclaim an opinion.
     4.74 The following is an example of a separate paragraph that might be
  added to the service auditor's report in that situation:
           Attestation standards established by the AICPA require that we re-
           quest a written assertion from management of Example Service Or-
           ganization that its description of its [type of system] throughout the
           period [date] to [date] is presented in accordance with the description
           criteria and that the controls stated in the description were suitabil-
           ity designed and operating effectively to provide reasonable assurance
           that the service organization's service commitments and system re-
           quirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services cri-
           teria. We requested that assertion, but Example Service Organization
           management did not provide such an assertion.


  Report Paragraphs Describing the Matter Giving Rise to
  the Modiﬁcation

  Illustrative Separate Paragraphs When There Are Material
  Misstatements in the Description
       4.75 Chapter 3 presents several situations in which the service auditor
  would generally determine that the description is not presented in accordance
  with the description criteria, in all material respects. In practice, if the service
  auditor makes such a determination, the service auditor works with service
  organization management to make the necessary changes to the description for
  it to be presented in accordance with the description criteria. If management
  refuses to amend the description, the service auditor may decide to withdraw
  from the engagement. In accordance with paragraph .70 of AT-C section 205, if
  the service auditor decides to continue with the engagement, the service auditor
  should modify the opinion paragraph of the report.
      4.76 Examples of separate paragraphs that would be added to the service
  auditor's report if management is unwilling to amend a description that is not
  presented in accordance with the description criteria, in all material respects,
  are presented beginning at paragraph 4.77.

  Description Includes Controls That Have Not Been Implemented
     4.77 The following is an example of a separate paragraph that would be
  added to the service auditor's report when the description includes controls that
  have not been implemented:
           The accompanying description states that Example Service Organiza-
           tion's system is protected against unauthorized logical access through
           the use of operator identification numbers and passwords. Based on in-
           quiries of staff personnel and observation of activities, we determined
           that operator identification numbers and passwords are used in appli-
           cations A and B but not in application C.

AAG-SOP 4.74                                                        ©2022, AICPA
        Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report         219
Description Includes Information That Cannot Be Objectively Evaluated
    4.78 The following is an example of a separate paragraph that would be
added to the service auditor's report when the description of the service orga-
nization's system includes subjective information that is not measurable:

        On page XX of the accompanying description, Example Service Orga-
        nization states that its data analytics system is "the industry's best
        system" and "is staffed by the most talented IT personnel." Because
        there are no criteria against which these attributes can be measured,
        these statements cannot be measured or objectively evaluated within
        the scope of this examination.

Description Omits Relevant Changes to Controls
    4.79 The following is an example of a separate paragraph that would be
added to the service auditor's report when the description does not address
relevant changes to the service organization's controls:

        The accompanying description states that the information security
        group monitors and reviews user access to the data analytics appli-
        cation. Inquiries of staff personnel indicate that this control was first
        implemented on July 1, 20XX, three months after the beginning of the
        period addressed by this report. Description criterion 9 requires dis-
        closure in the description of relevant details of significant changes to
        the system during that period.

Description Omits CUECs
   4.80 The following is an example of a separate paragraph that would be
added to the service auditor's report when the description omits CUECs:

        Example Service Organization has omitted from its description a
        statement indicating that user entities should have controls in place
        that limit access to user-defined indexes to authorized individuals. De-
        scription criterion 6 requires disclosure of complementary user entity
        controls when such controls are necessary, in combination with con-
        trols at the service organization, to provide reasonable assurance that
        the service organization's service commitments and system require-
        ments were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.

Description Omits CSOCs
   4.81 The following is an example of a separate paragraph that would be
added to the service auditor's report when the description omits CSOCs:

        The description does not disclose that subservice organizations that
        provide services to Example Service Organization should have con-
        trols in place that limit access to user-defined tables to authorized in-
        dividuals or that complementary subservice organization controls are
        necessary, in combination with controls at Example Service Organiza-
        tion, to provide reasonable assurance that Example Service Organiza-
        tion's service commitments and system requirements were achieved
        based on the applicable trust services criteria. Description criterion 7
        requires disclosure of such information.

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 4.81
220   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  Description Does Not Disclose That Service Organization Uses a
  Subservice Organization
      4.82 The following is an example of a separate paragraph that would be
  added to the service auditor's report when the service organization has not dis-
  closed the existence of a subservice organization, the functions it performs, and
  other related matters:
           The description does not indicate that Example Service Organization
           uses a subservice organization for computer processing. Description
           criterion 7 requires disclosure of this and other information about
           the subservice organization when controls at the subservice organi-
           zation are necessary, in combination with controls at Example Service
           Organization, to provide reasonable assurance that Example Service
           Organization's service commitments and system requirements were
           achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.

  Description Includes Information Not Relevant to the Trust Services
  Category Addressed by the Engagement
      4.83 The following is an example of a separate paragraph that would be
  added to the service auditor's report when the description includes information
  that is not relevant to the trust services category addressed by the engagement,
  and the service organization refuses to place the information in a separate sec-
  tion of the report identified as, for example, "Other Information Provided by
  Example Service Organization," or to exclude it from the description:
           The accompanying description includes the controls Example Service
           Organization performs when obtaining consent for new uses of per-
           sonal information to achieve its privacy commitments and system
           requirements based on the applicable trust services criteria for pri-
           vacy. Because our examination was limited to the system's controls
           to provide reasonable assurance that Example Service Organization's
           availability commitments and system requirements were achieved
           based on the applicable trust services criteria, we did not examine the
           suitability of design or operating effectiveness of controls to provide
           reasonable assurance that Example Service Organization's privacy
           commitments and system requirements were achieved based on the
           applicable trust services criteria for privacy. Therefore, such controls
           should not be included in the description of Example Service Organi-
           zation's payroll system.
  In these circumstances, because management refuses to remove the other in-
  formation and place it in a separate section of the report, the service auditor
  may also disclaim an opinion on that information by adding the words "and,
  accordingly, we express no opinion on them" at the end of that separate para-
  graph.

  Description Omits Applicable Trust Services Criteria
      4.84 If service organization management inappropriately omits one or
  more applicable trust services criteria from the description of the service or-
  ganization's system, the service auditor would generally request that manage-
  ment include the omitted criteria and related controls. If management refuses
  to do so, the service auditor should disclaim an opinion or withdraw from the
  engagement in accordance with paragraph .77 of AT-C section 205.

AAG-SOP 4.82                                                      ©2022, AICPA
        Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report         221
Other Information Provided by the Service Organization Is Materially
Inconsistent With Information in the Description of the Service
Organization’s System
    4.85 The following is an example of a separate paragraph that would be
added to the service auditor's report when other information provided by the
service organization is materially inconsistent with the information in the de-
scription of the service organization's system and the service organization re-
fuses to correct it or remove it from the description:
        The information in section 5, "Other Information Provided by Example
        Service Organization," that describes the processing of dental claims
        by Example Service Organization is presented by management of Ex-
        ample Service Organization to provide additional information and is
        not a part of Example Service Organization's description of its medi-
        cal claims processing system during the period June 1, 20X0, to May
        31, 20X1. Information about Example Service Organization's dental
        claims processing has not been subjected to the procedures applied in
        the examination and, accordingly, we express no opinion on it. How-
        ever, we noted that information in section 5 indicating that Exam-
        ple Service Organization provides in-house dental claims processing is
        materially inconsistent with Example Service Organization's descrip-
        tion of its medical claims processing system, which states that dental
        claims processing is outsourced to another organization.

Illustrative Separate Paragraphs: Material Deﬁciencies in the
Suitability of Controls
     4.86 Chapter 3 presents several situations in which the service auditor
would generally determine that the controls are not suitably designed, in all
material respects. Examples of separate paragraphs that should be added to
the service auditor's reports in such situations in accordance with paragraph
.75 of AT-C section 205 are presented beginning at paragraph 4.87.

Controls Are Not Suitably Designed
    4.87 The following is an example of a separate paragraph that would be
added to the service auditor's report preceding the opinion paragraph if the
service auditor concludes that controls are not suitably designed:
        The accompanying description of ABC Service Organization's system
        states on page 8 that ABC Service Organization's system supervisor
        makes changes to the systems only if the changes are authorized,
        tested, and documented. The procedures, however, do not include a re-
        quirement for approval of the change before the change is placed into
        operation. As a result, controls were not suitably designed or operat-
        ing effectively throughout the period [date] to [date] to provide reason-
        able assurance that the service organization's service commitments
        and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust
        services criteria.
Controls Were Not Suitably Designed During a Portion of the Period
     4.88 The following is an example of a separate paragraph that would be
added to the service auditor's report preceding the opinion paragraph if the
service auditor concludes that controls are not suitably designed for a portion
of the period under examination:

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 4.88
222   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

           The accompanying description of ABC Service Organization's sys-
           tem states on page 8 that ABC Service Organization's system super-
           visor makes changes to the system only if the changes are autho-
           rized, tested, and documented. During the period January 1, 20XX,
           to March 31, 20XX, however, controls related to proper authorization,
           testing, and documentation of system changes were not consistently
           performed. On April 1, 20XX, ABC Service Organization implemented
           a procedure requiring that all changes be authorized, tested, and docu-
           mented by the director of application development before being placed
           into operation. As a result, during the period January 1, 20XX, to
           March 31, 20XX, the controls were not suitably designed or operating
           effectively to provide reasonable assurance that the service organiza-
           tion's service commitments and system requirements were achieved
           based the applicable trust services criteria.

  Scope Limitation Related to Suitability of Design of Controls
       4.89 The following is an example of a separate paragraph that would be
  added to the service auditor's report when the service auditor is unable to obtain
  sufficient appropriate evidence about the suitability of design of controls:
           Page XX of the accompanying description states that Example Ser-
           vice Organization's [identify the party who does this] researches and
           resolves events logged by the intrusion detection software. Example
           Service Organization's logging software was replaced on July 15, 20X0,
           and sufficient appropriate evidence that independent research and
           resolution were performed prior to July 15, 20X0, was not available. As
           a result, we were unable to determine whether Example Service Or-
           ganization's controls were suitably designed and operating effectively
           during the period January 1 to July 14, 20X0, to provide reasonable as-
           surance that the service organization's service commitments and sys-
           tem requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services
           criteria.

  Illustrative Separate Paragraphs: Material Deﬁciencies in the
  Operating Effectiveness of Controls
      4.90 Chapter 3 presents several situations in which the service auditor
  would determine that the controls are not operating effectively, in all material
  respects. Examples of separate paragraphs that should be added to the service
  auditor's reports in such situations, in accordance with paragraph .71 of AT-C
  section 205, are presented beginning at paragraph 4.92.
      4.91 The service auditor may conclude that controls are suitably designed
  but are not operating effectively. The following is an example of a separate para-
  graph that should be added to the service auditor's report when the service
  auditor determines that controls are not operating effectively:
      ABC Service Organization states in the description of its system that the
      director of IT may approve emergency changes to the system without re-
      ceiving a written request for such changes if the changes are documented
      within 48 hours after implementation into production. However, as noted
      on page 155 of the description of tests of controls and the results thereof,
      controls related to the authorization of emergency changes were not consis-
      tently performed and, therefore, were not operating effectively throughout
      the period [date] to [date]. As a result, controls did not provide reasonable

AAG-SOP 4.89                                                      ©2022, AICPA
        Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report         223
    assurance that the service organization's service commitments and system
    requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.
Controls Were Not Operating Effectively During a Portion of the Period
to Achieve the Service Commitments and System Requirements
     4.92 The following is an example of a separate paragraph that would be
added to the service auditor's report when controls were not operating effec-
tively to achieve one or more service commitments and system requirements
for a portion of the report period (assumed to be January 1, 20X1, to March 31,
20X1, in this example):
        The accompanying description of ABC Service Organization's system
        states on page 8 that ABC Service Organization's system supervi-
        sor makes changes to the system only if the changes are authorized,
        tested, and documented. However, as noted in section 4, controls re-
        lated to proper authorization of system changes were not consistently
        performed during the period January 1, 20X1, to March 31, 20X1. As a
        result, during the period January 1, 20X1, to March 31, 20X1, the con-
        trols were not operating effectively to provide reasonable assurance
        that the service organization's service commitments and system re-
        quirements were achieved based the applicable trust services criteria.

Scope Limitation Related to Operating Effectiveness of Controls
    4.93 The following is an example of a separate paragraph that should
be added to the service auditor's report if the service auditor is unable to ob-
tain sufficient appropriate evidence regarding the operating effectiveness of
controls:
        Example Service Organization states in its description of its [type of
        system] that it has automated controls in place to log and track security
        incidents for research and resolution. However, electronic records of
        the performance of this control for the period January 1, 20X1, to July
        31, 20X1, were deleted because of a computer processing error, and
        therefore, tests of the operating effectiveness of this control could not
        be performed for that period. Consequently, we were unable to deter-
        mine whether the service organization's controls operated effectively
        during the period January 1, 20X1, to July 31, 20X1, to provide reason-
        able assurance that its service commitments and system requirements
        were achieved based on trust services criterion CC6.1, The entity im-
        plements logical access security software, infrastructure, and architec-
        tures over protected information assets to protect them from security
        events to meet the entity's objectives.


Other Matters Related to the Service Auditor’s Report

Emphasis-of-Matter Paragraphs and Other-Matter Paragraphs
    4.94 The service auditor may consider it necessary to draw users' atten-
tion to the following:

        • Amanagement's
             matter or matters appropriately presented or disclosed by
                        description, assertion, or other information section
             that, in the service auditor's professional judgment, are of such

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 4.94
224   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                   importance that they are fundamental to users' understanding of
                   the system (emphasis-of-matter paragraph)
             •     A matter or matters other than those presented or disclosed by
                   management that are relevant to users' understanding of a SOC
                   2 engagement, the service auditor's responsibilities, or the service
                   auditor's report (other-matter paragraph)

       4.95 The service auditor may draw users' attention to such matters by in-
  cluding an emphasis-of-matter paragraph or other-matter paragraph, as appli-
  cable, in the service auditor's report. Because paragraphs emphasizing matters
  such as those in the preceding paragraph are not intended to detract from the
  service auditor's opinion on the subject matter, paragraph .82 of AT-C section
  205 indicates that emphasis-of-matter paragraphs should be segregated from
  paragraphs that relate to the service auditor's opinion on the subject matter or
  any other reporting responsibilities and should be worded in a way that makes
  it clear that the paragraph is not intended to detract from the opinion.

       4.96 The service auditor may adapt and apply the guidance in AU-C sec-
  tion 706, Emphasis-of-Matter Paragraphs and Other-Matter Paragraphs in the
  Independent Auditor's Report.11 The following is an example of an emphasis-of-
  matter paragraph for a situation in which the service organization experienced
  a significant operating disruption after the examination period:
             As described on page X of "Other Information Provided by Example
             Service Organization," after the period covered by the examination,
             Example Service Organization's data center system was flooded and
             rendered inoperable for a period of two weeks by a severe storm in
             January, 20XX.

  Distribution of the Report by Management
      4.97 When engaged by the service organization, the service auditor pro-
  vides the report to management of the service organization, and management
  distributes the report to the parties to whom use of the report is restricted.
  A service auditor is not responsible for controlling a client's distribution of a
  restricted-use report.

      4.98 In some cases, however, service organization management may not
  be the engaging party (for example, if the service auditor is engaged by one or
  more user entities). In that case, the service auditor provides the report only to
  the party that engaged the service auditor.

      4.99 When establishing the terms of the engagement, the service auditor's
  understanding with the engaging party may include the fact that the use of the
  SOC 2 report will be restricted to the parties identified in the report. In addi-
  tion, it is good practice for the service auditor to inform the engaging party that
  restricted-use reports are not intended for distribution to unspecified parties.
  The service auditor may obtain from the engaging party an agreement that the
  engaging party and the specified parties will not distribute the report to parties
  other than those identified in the report.



      11   All AU-C sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.



AAG-SOP 4.95                                                                 ©2022, AICPA
         Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report          225
Service Auditor’s Recommendations for
Improving Controls
     4.100 Although it is not the objective of a service auditor's engagement, a
service auditor may develop recommendations to improve a service organiza-
tion's controls. The service auditor and service organization management agree
on whether and how such recommendations will be communicated. Typically,
the service auditor includes this information in a separate written communi-
cation provided only to service organization management.


Other Information Not Covered by the Service
Auditor’s Report
    4.101 Service organization management may wish to communicate to re-
port users information that is beyond the scope of the engagement. Such infor-
mation may be prepared by service organization management or by another
party. For example, service organization management may want to include
other information, such as the following, in the SOC 2 report:

        • Future plans for new systems or system conversions
        • Other  services provided by the service organization that are not
          included in the scope of the engagement
        • Qualitative  information, such as marketing claims, that may not
          be objectively measurable
        • Responses   from management to deviations identified by the ser-
          vice auditor, such as information about causative factors for devi-
             ations identified in the service auditor's tests of controls, the con-
             trols that mitigate the effect of the deviations, corrective actions
             taken, and expected future plans to correct controls
        •    A report comparing the service organization's performance to its
             commitments to user entities per service-level agreements or a
             newsletter containing information about events at the service
             organization
        •    A description of a subsequent event that does not affect the func-
             tions and processing performed by the service organization during
             the period covered by the service auditor's report but that may be
             of interest to report users
        •    Information relating to compliance with a process or control
             framework, such as a mapping of controls to the framework, when
             management has not identified compliance with such a framework
             as a principal service commitment or system requirement. (Para-
             graph 4.113 discusses reporting on process or control frameworks
             when they have been identified as principal service commitments
             or system requirements).

     4.102 Generally, such other information is presented in a separate section
of the report entitled "Other Information Provided by the Service Organiza-
tion." Information in this section is not covered by the service auditor's report;
however, the service auditor is required to perform the procedures outlined in
paragraph 4.104 on the other information.


©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 4.102
226   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

       4.103 If service organization management wishes to include its responses
  to deviations in tests of controls in the description of the service organization's
  system rather than in the section of the report containing information that is
  not covered by the service auditor's report, such responses are usually included
  along with the description of the applicable control and related trust services
  criteria. In that case, the service auditor would determine through inquiries, in
  combination with other procedures, whether there is evidence supporting the
  action described by management in its response.
      4.104 Paragraph .58 of AT-C section 205 states that the service auditor
  should read the other information to identify material inconsistencies, if any,
  with the subject matter, assertion, or report. If, upon reading the other informa-
  tion, the service auditor believes that either of the following applies, the service
  auditor should discuss the matter with service organization management and
  take further action as appropriate:
          a. There are material inconsistencies between the other information
             and the description of the service organization's system, manage-
             ment's assertion, or the service auditor's report.
          b. A material misstatement of fact exists in the other information,
             the description of the service organization's system, management's
             assertion, or the service auditor's report. (Other information may
             bring to light a material misstatement of fact in the description,
             assertion, or in the service auditor's report that the service auditor
             did not identify when evaluating whether
                   i. the description presents the system that was designed and
                      implemented throughout the period in accordance with the
                      description criteria,
                  ii. controls were suitably designed, or
                 iii. controls were operating effectively.)
      4.105 If management refuses to correct or delete the other information
  containing a material inconsistency or a material misstatement of fact, para-
  graph .A73 of AT-C section 205 identifies the following examples of further ac-
  tions the service auditor may take:
           • Requesting    that management consult with a qualified third party,
             such as the appropriate party's legal counsel
           • Obtaining
             of action
                         legal advice about the consequences of different courses

           • Ifexample,
                 required or permissible, communicating with third parties (for
                        a regulator)
           • report the material inconsistency in the service auditor's
             Describing

           • Withdrawing     from the engagement when withdrawal is possible
             under applicable laws and regulations
      4.106 The following is an example of a separate paragraph that would be
  added to the service auditor's report to identify other information provided by
  the service organization and to disclaim an opinion on it:
           The information attached to the description titled "Other Informa-
           tion Provided by Example Service Organization" is presented by Ex-
           ample Service Organization management to describe the service or-
           ganization's medical billing system and is not a part of the service

AAG-SOP 4.103                                                       ©2022, AICPA
         Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report          227
         organization's description of its medical records management system
         made available to user entities during the period June 1, 20X0, to May
         31, 20X1. Information about Example Service Organization's medical
         billing system has not been subjected to the procedures applied in the
         examination and, accordingly, we express no opinion on it.
    4.107 Paragraph 4.85 presents an illustrative separate paragraph that
would be added to the service auditor's report when the description includes
information that is materially inconsistent with other information contained in
the SOC 2 report and management refuses to remove it from the description.


Illustrative Type 2 Reports
     4.108 Although this guide specifies the information to be included in a
description of a service organization's system, it is not specific about the format
for a SOC 2 report. Service organizations and service auditors may organize
and present the required information in a variety of formats. An illustrative
description of the system is available on the AICPA website and illustrative
assertions and service auditor's reports are available in appendix C.
    4.109 Appendix C contains the following illustrative type 2 reports:
         • Appendix C-1, "Illustrative Management Assertion and Service
           Auditor's Report for a Type 2 Examination (Carved-Out Controls
           of a Subservice Organization and Complementary Subservice Or-
           ganization Controls and Complementary User Entity Controls)"
         • Appendix C-2, "Illustrative Service Organization and Subservice
           Organization Management Assertions and Service Auditor's Re-
           port for a Type 2 Examination (Subservice Organization Pre-
           sented Using the Inclusive Method and Complementary User
           Entity Controls)"
         • Appendix C-3, "Illustrative Service Auditor's Report for a Type 2
           Examination in Which the Service Auditor Disclaims an Opinion
           Because of a Scope Limitation"
Headings in those illustrative reports are optional.


Preparing a Type 1 Report
    4.110 When the service auditor has been engaged to perform a type 1
examination, certain of the elements in table 4-3 would be tailored to refer
specifically to the subject matters addressed in that examination. For instance,
among other things, all references to management's assertion and the service
auditor's opinion would be revised to refer only to the following:
         a. The description of the [name or type] system presents the system
             that was designed and implemented as of [date] in accordance with
             the description criteria.
         b. The controls stated in the description were suitably designed as
             of [date] to provide reasonable assurance that the service organi-
             zation's service commitments and system requirements would be
             achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria if the con-
             trols operated effectively as of [date].
    4.111 In a type 1 examination, the service auditor does not express an
opinion about whether the controls operated effectively. Accordingly, the type 1

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 4.111
228   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  report would also not include a description of the service auditor's tests of con-
  trols and the results thereof.
       4.112 Appendix D presents an illustrative type 1 report. Headings in that
  illustrative report are optional.


  Meeting the Requirements of a Process
  or Control Framework
       4.113 When the description includes information about how the service
  organization's controls met the requirements of a process or control framework,
  report users may make assumptions about the service auditor's responsibilities
  for that information. For that reason, the service auditor may decide to add an
  emphasis-of-matter paragraph to the service auditor's report drawing attention
  to the information about the process or control framework and clarifying the
  service auditor's responsibility for it. The following illustrates a paragraph that
  might be added, after the scope paragraph of the service auditor's report, to
  clarify the service auditor's responsibility for such information:
           Management has identified, in the system description, a principal ser-
           vice commitment and related system requirements to implement con-
           trols to address the requirements of ABC framework. Accordingly,
           management has also included in the description information about
           how XYZ Service Organization's implemented controls address the
           requirements of that framework. Management has not, however, en-
           gaged us to express an opinion on whether XYZ Service Organization
           implemented controls that met the requirements of ABC Framework
           and, accordingly, we express no such opinion.


  SOC 2 Examination That Addresses Additional
  Criteria (SOC 2+)
      4.114 In accordance with paragraph .63 of AT-C section 205, in a SOC
  2+ examination, the service auditor should modify the scope and opinion para-
  graphs of the report to specifically address the controls implemented to meet
  the requirements of the process or control framework. The service auditor
  should also modify the management's responsibility and service auditor's re-
  sponsibility paragraphs to address the additional controls.
      4.115 In certain cases, the sponsoring organization that developed the pro-
  cess or control framework may also be an intended user. In such instances, the
  service auditor includes the sponsoring organization in the alert that restricts
  use of the report.
       4.116 If the additional criteria are only appropriate for a particular subset
  of intended users of the SOC 2 report, the service auditor may conclude that
  the alert should restrict use of the report to that subset of users in accordance
  with paragraph .64 of AT-C section 205.
     4.117 The service auditor may also consider whether to include an
  emphasis-of-matter paragraph to provide report users with additional infor-
  mation about the process or control framework.
     4.118 Appendix E, "Illustrative Service Auditor's Report for a SOC 2+
  Examination," presents an illustrative SOC 2+ service auditor's report.

AAG-SOP 4.112                                                      ©2022, AICPA
         Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report         229
Forming the Opinion and Preparing a SOC 3 Report
Elements of the SOC 3 Report
    4.119 As discussed in chapter 1, the SOC 3 report was designed as a
general-purpose report. Because the intended users of a SOC 3 report are dif-
ferent than the intended users of a SOC 2 report, there are some distinct dif-
ferences between the contents of a SOC 3 report and a SOC 2 report.
    4.120 The elements of a SOC 3 report are as follows:
        a. An assertion by service organization management about whether
           the controls were effective throughout the period to provide reason-
           able assurance that the service organization's service commitments
           and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable
           trust services criteria. As part of that assertion, management also
           describes the boundaries of the system and the service organiza-
           tion's principal service commitments and system requirements.
        b. An opinion by the service auditor on management's assertion
           about whether controls within the system were effective through-
           out the period to provide reasonable assurance that the service or-
           ganization's service commitments and system requirements were
           achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.
These elements are discussed further in the following paragraphs.

Management’s Assertion
     4.121 As discussed in the preceding paragraph, as part of its assertion,
management describes the boundaries of the system and the principal ser-
vice commitments and system requirements. The boundaries of the system ad-
dressed by the examination need to be clearly understood, defined, and commu-
nicated to report users. Report users need that information to enable them to
understand the scope of the service auditor's examination. They also need in-
formation about the service organization's principal service commitments and
system requirements to enable them to understand how the effectiveness of
controls was evaluated based on the applicable trust services criteria.
    4.122 Disclosures about the boundaries of the system would typically in-
clude matters such as the following:
        • The use of CUECs and CSOCs, when those are necessary, in
          combination with controls at the service organization, to provide
             reasonable assurance that the service organization's service com-
             mitments or system requirements were achieved based on the ap-
             plicable trust services criteria
        •    The use of subservice organizations, including whether manage-
             ment has elected to use the inclusive or carve-out method with
             respect to the services provided by subservice organizations
        •    Any other information that is likely to assist report users in un-
             derstanding the limitations on the service auditor's examination
             and opinion
    4.123 Disclosures about the boundaries of the system and the principal
service commitments and system requirements ordinarily would be included
in management's assertion or in an exhibit thereto. If management does not
include those disclosures in its assertion (or in an exhibit thereto), the service

©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 4.123
230   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  auditor would ordinarily conclude that the use of the service auditor's report
  would need to be restricted to intended users who have sufficient knowledge
  of the boundaries of the system and the service organization's principal ser-
  vice commitments and system requirements. In most situations, this would be
  limited to the service organization itself and its board of directors.

  Service Auditor’s Opinion
      4.124 In a SOC 3 report, the service auditor expresses an opinion on man-
  agement's assertion that the controls within the system were effective through-
  out the specified period to provide reasonable assurance that the service orga-
  nization's service commitments and system requirements were achieved based
  on the applicable trust services criteria, in all material respects.12

  Elements of the Service Auditor’s Report
      4.125 Similar to a SOC 2 report, the elements included in the service
  auditor's SOC 3 report are based on the requirements in AT-C section 205.
  Table 4-5 identifies the requirements in paragraphs .63–.64 of AT-C section
  205 on which each element of a service auditor's SOC 3 report is based.
  Table 4-5
                   Elements of a Service Auditor's SOC 3 Report

    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on           AT-C Section
   Which the              205
      SOC 3           Requirements
   Reporting          and Relevant             SOC 3 Reporting               Illustrative Service
   Element Is          Application              Elements and                   Auditor’s SOC 3
      Based             Guidance             Additional Guidance              Report Language
   par. .63a         A title that      The service auditor's                Independent Service
                     includes the word report should include a              Auditor's Report
                     independent       title that includes the
                                       word independent.
   par. .63b         An appropriate         An appropriate                  To: Management of XYZ
                     addressee as           addressee is determined         Service Organization
                     required by the        by the circumstances of
                     circumstances of       the engagement. (In
                     the engagement         most cases, the service
                                            auditor is engaged by
                                            the service organization
                                            and would address the
                                            service auditor's report
                                            to management of the
                                            service organization.
                                            However, the service
                                            auditor may be engaged
                                            by one or more user



       12 Although the service auditor expresses an opinion on the assertion in a SOC 3 examination,

  as described in this guide, paragraph .67 of AT-C section 205, Assertion-Based Examination Engage-
  ments, does permit a service auditor to express an opinion directly on the effectiveness of the controls
  within the system, if the service auditor so chooses.


AAG-SOP 4.124                                                                       ©2022, AICPA
             Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report                         231
        Elements of a Service Auditor's SOC 3 Report — continued
  Reference
   to AT-C
 Section 205
  Require-
  ment on           AT-C Section
 Which the              205
    SOC 3           Requirements
 Reporting          and Relevant            SOC 3 Reporting               Illustrative Service
 Element Is          Application             Elements and                   Auditor’s SOC 3
    Based             Guidance            Additional Guidance              Report Language
                                         entities or the board of
                                         directors of the service
                                         organization and, in
                                         such cases, would
                                         address and provide the
                                         report to the party that
                                         engaged the service
                                         auditor.)
 par. .63c        An identification      In a SOC 2 examination,        Scope
                  or description of      the service auditor            We have examined XYZ
                  the subject            reports directly on the        Service Organization's
                  matter or              subject matter; however,       (XYZ's) accompanying
                  assertion being        in a SOC 3 examination,        assertion, titled
                  reported on,           the service auditor            "Assertion of XYZ
                  including the          reports on                     Service Organization
                  point in time or       management's assertion.        Management"
                  period of time to      The report should              (assertion),13 that the
                  which the              identify management's          controls within XYZ's
                  measurement or         assertion about whether        medical claims
                  evaluation of the      the controls within the        processing system
                  subject matter or      service organization's         (system) were effective
                  assertion relates      system were effective          throughout the period
                                         throughout the period to       January 1, 20XX, to
                                         provide reasonable             December 31, 20XX, to
                                         assurance that the             provide reasonable
                                         service organization's         assurance that XYZ's
                                         service commitments            service commitments
                                         and system                     and system
                                         requirements were              requirements were
                                         achieved based on the          achieved based on the
                                         trust services criteria        trust services criteria
                                         relevant to security,          relevant to security,
                                         availability, processing       availability, processing
                                         integrity, confidentiality,    integrity, confidentiality,
                                         and privacy (applicable        and privacy (applicable
                                         trust services criteria)       trust services criteria)
                                         set forth in TSP section       set forth in TSP section
                                         100, 2017 Trust Services       100, 2017 Trust Services
                                         Criteria for Security,         Criteria for Security,
                                         Availability, Processing       Availability, Processing
                                         Integrity, Confidentiality,    Integrity, Confidentiality,
                                         and Privacy.                   and Privacy (With
                                                                        Revised Points of
                                                                        Focus — 2022).

                                                                                       (continued)

     13 As part of its assertion, management also describes the boundaries of the system and the

service organization's principal service commitments and system requirements. Such information is
ordinarily presented along with the assertion. If it is not presented, the service auditor would ordi-
narily modify the service auditor's report by including such information.


©2022, AICPA                                                                       AAG-SOP 4.125
232     SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

           Elements of a Service Auditor's SOC 3 Report — continued
    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on         AT-C Section
   Which the            205
      SOC 3         Requirements
   Reporting        and Relevant          SOC 3 Reporting             Illustrative Service
   Element Is        Application           Elements and                 Auditor’s SOC 3
      Based           Guidance          Additional Guidance            Report Language
      par. .63d   An identification     In a SOC 3 examination,       [See scope paragraph of
                  of the criteria       the effectiveness of         report]
                  against which the     controls is evaluated
                  subject matter        against the applicable
                  was measured or       trust services criteria,
                  evaluated             which are identified in
                                        the scope paragraph.
   par. .63e      A statement that      The report should            Service Organization's
                  identifies the        include an identification    Responsibilities
                  responsible party     of the responsible party     XYZ is responsible for its
                  and its               and its responsibilities,    service commitments
                  responsibility for    which generally include      and system
                  the subject           statements that service      requirements and for
                  matter being in       organization                 designing,
                  accordance with       management is                implementing, and
                  (or based on) the     responsible for the          operating effective
                  criteria or for its   following:                   controls within the
                  assertion             1. The service               system to provide
                                            organization's service   reasonable assurance
                                            commitments and          that XYZ's service
                                            system requirements      commitments and
                                            and for designing,       system requirements
                                            implementing, and        were achieved. XYZ has
                                            operating effective      also provided the
                                            controls within the      accompanying assertion
                                            system to provide        about the effectiveness
                                            reasonable assurance     of controls within the
                                            that the service         system. When preparing
                                            organization's service   its assertion, XYZ is
                                            commitments and          responsible for selecting,
                                            system requirements      and identifying in its
                                            were achieved            assertion, the applicable
                                        2. Providing the             trust services criteria
                                            accompanying             and for having a
                                            assertion about          reasonable basis for its
                                            whether the controls     assertion by performing
                                            within the system        an assessment of the
                                            were effective to        effectiveness of the
                                            provide reasonable       controls within the
                                            assurance that the       system.
                                            service organization's
                                            service commitments
                                            and system
                                            requirements were
                                            achieved




AAG-SOP 4.125                                                               ©2022, AICPA
            Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report                 233
      Elements of a Service Auditor's SOC 3 Report — continued
 Reference
  to AT-C
Section 205
 Require-
 ment on           AT-C Section
Which the              205
   SOC 3           Requirements
Reporting          and Relevant         SOC 3 Reporting             Illustrative Service
Element Is          Application          Elements and                 Auditor’s SOC 3
   Based             Guidance         Additional Guidance            Report Language
                                      3. Selecting, and
                                         identifying in its
                                         assertion, the
                                         applicable trust
                                         services criteria
                                      4. Having a reasonable
                                         basis for its assertion
                                         by performing an
                                         assessment of the
                                         effectiveness of the
                                         controls within the
                                         system based on the
                                         applicable trust
                                         services criteria
par. .63f        A statement that     As noted previously, in a    Service Auditor's
                 the practitioner's   SOC 3 engagement the         Responsibilities
                 responsibility is    service auditor              Our responsibility is to
                 to express an        expresses an opinion on      express an opinion,
                 opinion on the       the assertion rather         based on our
                 subject matter or    than the subject matters.    examination, on
                 assertion, based     The report should            management's assertion
                 on the               include a statement that     that controls within the
                 practitioner's       the service auditor is       system were effective
                 examination          responsible for              throughout the period to
                                      expressing an opinion,       provide reasonable
                                      based on the                 assurance that the
                                      examination, on              service organization's
                                      management's assertion       service commitments
                                      that controls within the     and system
                                      system were effective        requirements were
                                      throughout the period to     achieved based on the
                                      provide reasonable           applicable trust services
                                      assurance that the           criteria. Our
                                      service organization's       examination was
                                      service commitments          conducted in accordance
                                      and system                   with attestation
                                      requirements were            standards established by
                                      achieved based on the        the AICPA. Those
                                      applicable trust services    standards require that
                                      criteria.                    we plan and perform our
                                                                   examination to obtain
                                                                   reasonable assurance
                                                                   about whether
                                                                   management's assertion
                                                                   is fairly stated, in all
                                                                   material respects. We
                                                                   believe that the evidence
                                                                   we obtained is sufficient
                                                                   and appropriate to
                                                                   provide a reasonable
                                                                   basis for our opinion.

                                                                               (continued)


©2022, AICPA                                                                AAG-SOP 4.125
234   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

         Elements of a Service Auditor's SOC 3 Report — continued
    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on       AT-C Section
   Which the          205
      SOC 3       Requirements
   Reporting      and Relevant           SOC 3 Reporting            Illustrative Service
   Element Is      Application            Elements and                Auditor’s SOC 3
      Based         Guidance           Additional Guidance           Report Language
   par. .63g     A statement that      As noted earlier, in a     [See service auditor's
                  i. the               SOC 3 engagement the       responsibilities
                     practitioner's    service auditor            paragraph]
                     examination       expresses an opinion on
                     was conducted     the assertion rather
                     in accordance     than the subject matters.
                     with              In applying these
                     attestation       requirements, the
                     standards         service auditor generally
                     established by    includes in the report
                     the AICPA         the following
                 ii. those             statements:
                     standards         1. The examination was
                     require that         conducted in
                     the                  accordance with
                     practitioner         attestation standards
                     plan and             established by the
                     perform the          AICPA.
                     examination       2. Those standards
                     to obtain            require that the
                     reasonable           service auditor plan
                     assurance            and perform the
                     about whether        examination to
                     (1) the              obtain reasonable
                          subject         assurance about
                          matter is       whether
                          in accor-       management's
                          dance           assertion is fairly
                          with (or        stated, in all material
                          based on)       respects.
                          the          3. The service auditor
                          criteria,       believes the evidence
                          in all          obtained is sufficient
                          material        and appropriate to
                          respects        provide a reasonable
                          (or equiv-      basis for the opinion.
                          alent
                          language
                          regarding
                          the
                          subject
                          matter
                          and
                          criteria,
                          such as
                          the
                          language
                          used in
                          the
                          examples




AAG-SOP 4.125                                                            ©2022, AICPA
       Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report              235
    Elements of a Service Auditor's SOC 3 Report — continued

 Reference
  to AT-C
Section 205
 Require-
 ment on       AT-C Section
Which the          205
   SOC 3       Requirements
Reporting      and Relevant             SOC 3 Reporting     Illustrative Service
Element Is      Application              Elements and         Auditor’s SOC 3
   Based         Guidance             Additional Guidance    Report Language
                         in para-
                         graph
                         .A90 of
                         AT-C
                         section
                         205,
                         Assertion-
                         Based
                         Exami-
                         nation
                         Engage-
                         ments)
                         or
                   (2) the re-
                         sponsible
                         party's
                         assertion
                         is fairly
                         stated, in
                         all
                         material
                         respects
              iii. the
                   practitioner
                   believes the
                   evidence the
                   practitioner
                   obtained is
                   sufficient and
                   appropriate to
                   provide a
                   reasonable
                   basis for the
                   practitioner's
                   opinion

                                                                      (continued)




©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP 4.125
236   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

         Elements of a Service Auditor's SOC 3 Report — continued

    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on       AT-C Section
   Which the          205
      SOC 3       Requirements
   Reporting      and Relevant        SOC 3 Reporting           Illustrative Service
   Element Is      Application         Elements and               Auditor’s SOC 3
      Based         Guidance        Additional Guidance          Report Language
   par. .63h     A description of   In describing the nature   Our examination
                 the nature of an   of a SOC 3 examination,    included:
                 assertion-based    the service auditor
                 examination        generally indicates that
                                                               • Obtaining an
                                                                  understanding of the
                 engagement         a SOC 3 examination           system and the
                                    includes the following:       service organization's
                                    1. Obtaining an               service commitments
                                        understanding of the      and system
                                        system and the            requirements
                                        service                • Assessing the risks
                                        organization's            that controls were
                                        service commitments       not effective to
                                        and system                achieve XYZ's service
                                        requirements              commitments and
                                    2. Assessing the risks        system requirements
                                        that controls were        based on the
                                        not effective to          applicable trust
                                        achieve the service       services criteria
                                        organization's         • Performing
                                        service commitments       procedures to obtain
                                        and system                evidence about
                                        requirements based        whether controls
                                        on the applicable         within the system
                                        trust services            were effective to
                                        criteria                  achieve XYZ's service
                                    3. Performing                 commitments and
                                        procedures to obtain      system requirements
                                        evidence about            based the applicable
                                        whether controls          trust services criteria
                                        within the system
                                        were effective to      Our examination also
                                        achieve the service    included performing
                                        organization's         such other procedures
                                        service commitments    as we considered
                                        and system             necessary in the
                                        requirements based     circumstances.
                                        the applicable trust
                                        services criteria
                                    In addition, the service
                                    auditor may indicate
                                    that the examination
                                    also included
                                    performing other
                                    procedures the service
                                    auditor considered
                                    necessary in the
                                    circumstances.



AAG-SOP 4.125                                                         ©2022, AICPA
            Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report               237
      Elements of a Service Auditor's SOC 3 Report — continued

 Reference
  to AT-C
Section 205
 Require-
 ment on          AT-C Section
Which the             205
   SOC 3          Requirements
Reporting         and Relevant         SOC 3 Reporting           Illustrative Service
Element Is         Application          Elements and               Auditor’s SOC 3
   Based            Guidance         Additional Guidance          Report Language
par. .63i        The service         The service auditor's      We are required to be
                 auditor's report    report should include a    independent and to
                 should include a    statement that the         meet our other ethical
                 statement that      service auditor is         responsibilities in
                 the service         required to be             accordance with
                 auditor is          independent and to         relevant ethical
                 required to be      meet the service           requirements relating
                 independent and     auditor's other ethical    to the engagement.
                 to meet the         responsibilities in
                 service auditor's   accordance with
                 other ethical       relevant ethical
                 responsibilities    requirements related to
                 in accordance       the examination
                 with relevant       engagement.
                 ethical
                 requirements
                 related to the
                 examination
                 engagement.
par. .63j        A statement that    The service auditor        Inherent Limitations
                 describes           should consider            There are inherent
                 significant         including in the report    limitations in the
                 inherent            the following              effectiveness of any
                 limitations, if     statements:                system of internal
                 any, associated
                 with the
                                     • There are inherent       control, including the
                                       limitations in the       possibility of human
                 measurement or        effectiveness of any     error and the
                 evaluation of the     system of internal       circumvention of
                 subject matter        control, including the   controls.
                 against the           possibility of human
                 criteria                                       Because of their nature,
                                       error and the            controls may not always
                                       circumvention of         operate effectively to
                                       controls.

                                                                            (continued)




©2022, AICPA                                                             AAG-SOP 4.125
238   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

         Elements of a Service Auditor's SOC 3 Report — continued

    Reference
     to AT-C
   Section 205
    Require-
    ment on       AT-C Section
   Which the          205
      SOC 3       Requirements
   Reporting      and Relevant         SOC 3 Reporting            Illustrative Service
   Element Is      Application          Elements and                Auditor’s SOC 3
      Based         Guidance         Additional Guidance           Report Language
                                     • Because of their          provide reasonable
                                       nature, controls may      assurance that the
                                       not always operate        service organization's
                                       effectively to provide    service commitments
                                       reasonable assurance      and system
                                       that the service          requirements were
                                       organization's service    achieved based on the
                                       commitments and           applicable trust services
                                       system requirements       criteria. Also, the
                                       were achieved based       projection to the future
                                       on the applicable         of any conclusions about
                                       trust services            the effectiveness of
                                       criteria. Also, the       controls is subject to the
                                       projection to the         risk that controls may
                                       future of any             become inadequate
                                       conclusions about the     because of changes in
                                       effectiveness of          conditions or that the
                                       controls is subject to    degree of compliance
                                       the risks that            with the policies or
                                       controls may become       procedures may
                                       inadequate because        deteriorate.
                                       of changes in
                                       conditions or that the
                                       degree of compliance
                                       with the policies or
                                       procedures may
                                       deteriorate.
   par. .63k     The                 The service auditor's       Opinion
                 practitioner's      opinion should be           In our opinion,
                 opinion about       expressed in a              management's assertion
                 whether the         statement about             that the controls within
                 subject matter is   whether management's        XYZ's medical claims
                 in accordance       assertion that the          processing system were
                 with (or based      controls within the         effective throughout the
                 on) the criteria,   service organization's      period January 1, 20XX,
                 in all material     system were effective       to December 31, 20XX,
                 respects            throughout the period       to provide reasonable
                                     to provide reasonable       assurance that XYZ's
                                     assurance that the          service commitments
                                     service organization's      and system
                                     service commitments         requirements were
                                     and system                  achieved based on the
                                     requirements were           applicable trust services
                                     achieved is fairly stated   criteria is fairly stated,
                                     based on the applicable     in all material respects.
                                     trust services criteria,
                                     in all material respects.




AAG-SOP 4.125                                                           ©2022, AICPA
            Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report               239
      Elements of a Service Auditor's SOC 3 Report — continued

 Reference
  to AT-C
Section 205
 Require-
 ment on          AT-C Section
Which the             205
   SOC 3          Requirements
Reporting         and Relevant          SOC 3 Reporting           Illustrative Service
Element Is         Application           Elements and               Auditor’s SOC 3
   Based            Guidance          Additional Guidance          Report Language
par. .63l        The manual or        The service auditor's      Service auditor's
                 printed signature    report should include      signature
                 of the               the manual or printed
                 practitioner's       signature of the service
                 firm                 auditor's firm.
par. .63m        The city and         The service auditor's      City and state where the
                 state where the      report should include      report is issued
                 practitioner's       the city and state where
                 report is issued     the service auditor's
                                      report is issued.
par. .63l        The date of the      The service auditor        Date of the service
                 report (The          should date the report     auditor's report
                 report should be     no earlier than the date
                 dated no earlier     on which the service
                 than the date on     auditor has obtained
                 which the            sufficient appropriate
                 practitioner has     evidence to support the
                 obtained             opinion, including
                 sufficient           evidence that
                 appropriate          a. the attestation
                 evidence on             documentation has
                 which to base the       been reviewed and
                 practitioner's
                 opinion,             b. service organization
                 including               management has
                 evidence that           provided a written
                                         assertion.
                 a. the
                     attestation
                     documenta-
                     tion has been
                     reviewed;
                 b. if applicable,
                     the written
                     presentation
                     of the subject
                     matter has
                     been
                     prepared; and
                  c. the
                     responsible
                     party has
                     provided a
                     written
                     assertion.)




©2022, AICPA                                                              AAG-SOP 4.125
240   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

       4.126 As discussed in chapter 1, the SOC 3 report has been designed as
  a general-use report; however, nothing precludes the service auditor from re-
  stricting the use of the service auditor's report to a specific group of users when
  the service auditor believes one or more groups of potential users are likely to
  misunderstand the report. Examples of circumstances in which the service au-
  ditor might include an alert restricting the use of the report include situations
  in which the service auditor believes the following:
           • Report  users need to understand how the system interacts with
             user entity systems.
           • Report users are unable to access communications provided by the
             service organization, when those communications are not avail-
               able to the general public.
           •   Report users need to understand the effectiveness of controls at
               the subservice organization in order to understand the service au-
               ditor's report, when the scope of the engagement carves out a sub-
               service organization.
           •   Only a specific group of report users is likely to understand the ser-
               vice auditor's report when the opinion has been modified because
               of a material description misstatement or for a scope limitation.
       4.127 When the service auditor concludes that the opinion on effective-
  ness of controls should be modified because of a material deficiency or the lack
  of appropriate sufficient evidence, the service auditor should follow the require-
  ments in paragraphs .70–.83 of AT-C section 205 and generally use the guidance
  described in this chapter for making such modifications. However, the sepa-
  rate paragraphs included in the report to explain the basis for the modification
  would not refer to testing exceptions identified in the description of the results
  of the service auditor's procedures because such information is not included in
  a SOC 3 report.

  Illustrative SOC 3 Management Assertion and Service
  Auditor’s Report
       4.128 Appendix F, "Illustrative Management Assertion and Service Audi-
  tor's Report for a SOC 3 Examination," presents an illustrative management
  assertion and service auditor's report that might be appropriate for a SOC 3
  report.




AAG-SOP 4.126                                                      ©2022, AICPA
     Comparison of SOC 1, SOC 2, and SOC 3 Examinations and Related Reports        241
Appendix A
  Comparison of SOC 1, SOC 2, and SOC 3
  Examinations and Related Reports
  This appendix is nonauthoritative and is included for informational purposes
  only.
  The term system and organization controls (SOC) refers to the suite of ser-
  vices developed by the AICPA that practitioners may provide in connection
  with system-level controls of a service organization or system- or entity-level
  controls of other organizations. The following are designations for three such
  examinations and the source of the guidance for performing and reporting on
  them:
          • SOC 1 — SOC for Service Organizations: ICFR. AT-C section 320,
            Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organiza-
                tion Relevant to User Entities' Internal Control Over Financial
                Reporting,1 and AICPA Guide Reporting on an Examination of
                Controls at a Service Organization Relevant to User Entities' In-
                ternal Control Over Financial Reporting (SOC 1® )
          •     SOC 2 — SOC for Service Organizations: Trust Services Crite-
                ria. AT-C section 205, Assertion-Based Examination Engagements,
                and AICPA Guide SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Con-
                trols at a Service Organization Relevant to Security, Availability,
                Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, or Privacy
          •     SOC 3 — SOC for Service Organizations: Trust Services Criteria
                for General Use Report. AT-C section 205 and AICPA Guide SOC
                2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organi-
                zation Relevant to Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Con-
                fidentiality, or Privacy
  Practitioners performing any of those examinations are also required to comply
  with the requirements in AT-C section 105, Concepts Common to All Attesta-
  tion Engagements, because they apply to all attestation engagements. A prac-
  titioner performing a SOC 1 examination is also required to comply with the
  requirements in AT-C section 205.
  The following table identifies differences between SOC 1, SOC 2, and SOC 3
  examinations and related reports:




     1 All AT-C sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.



  ©2022, AICPA                                                           AAG-SOP APP A
242   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                              SOC 1                       SOC 2                     SOC 3
                           Examination                 Examination               Examination
   What are the       In AT-C section 320,        DC section 200, 2018         TSP section 100
   criteria for       paragraph .15 contains      Description Criteria for     contains the
   the                the minimum criteria        a Description of a           criteria for
   examination        for evaluating the          Service Organization's       evaluating the
   and where          description of the          System in a SOC 2®           effectiveness of
   are they           service organization's      Report (With Revised         controls.
   stated?            system, paragraph .16       Implementation
                      contains the criteria for   Guidance — 2022),2
                      evaluating the              contains the criteria for
                      suitability of the design   evaluating the
                      of the controls, and        description of the
                      paragraph .17 contains      service organization's
                      the criteria for            system.
                      evaluating the              TSP section 100, 2017
                      operating effectiveness     Trust Services Criteria
                      of the controls.            for Security,
                                                  Availability, Processing
                                                  Integrity,
                                                  Confidentiality, and
                                                  Privacy (With Revised
                                                  Points of Focus —
                                                  2022),3 contains the
                                                  criteria for evaluating
                                                  the design and
                                                  operating effectiveness
                                                  of the controls.
   What is the        To provide                  To provide service           To provide
   purpose of         management of the           organization                 interested parties
   the report?        service organization,       management, user             with a service
                      user entities, and the      entities, business           auditor's opinion
                      independent auditors        partners, and other          about the
                      of user entities'           specified parties with       effectiveness of
                      financial statements        information and a            controls at the
                      with information and a      service auditor's            service
                      service auditor's           opinion about controls       organization
                      opinion about controls      at the service               relevant to
                      at a service                organization relevant        security,
                      organization that are       to security, availability,   availability,
                      likely to be relevant to    processing integrity,        processing
                      user entities' internal     confidentiality, or          integrity,
                      control over financial      privacy.                     confidentiality, or
                      reporting. The report                                    privacy.
                      enables the user
                      auditor to perform risk
                      assessment procedures
                      and, if the report is a
                      type 2 report, to use
                      the report as audit
                      evidence that controls
                      at the service
                      organization are
                      operating effectively.


      2   All DC sections can be found in AICPA Description Criteria.
      3   All TSP sections can be found in AICPA Trust Services Criteria.


AAG-SOP APP A                                                                    ©2022, AICPA
  Comparison of SOC 1, SOC 2, and SOC 3 Examinations and Related Reports                 243
                    SOC 1                       SOC 2                   SOC 3
                 Examination                 Examination             Examination
What         Components of a            Components of a           Components of
are the      Type 1 Report              Type 1 Report             the Report
components   a. Management's            a. The description of the a. A written
of the          description of the         service organization's    assertion by
report?         service                    system                    management of
                organization's          b. A written assertion       the service
                system                     by management of          organization
             b. A written assertion        the service               about whether
                by management of           organization about        the controls
                the service                whether                   within the
                organization about                                   system were
                                             i. the description
                whether, based on                                    effective
                                                of the service
                the criteria in                                      throughout the
                                                organization's
                management's                                         specified period
                                                system presents
                assertion,                                           to provide
                                                the service
                                                                     reasonable
                  i. management's               organization's
                                                                     assurance that
                     description of             system that was
                                                                     the service
                     the service                designed and
                                                                     organization's
                     organization's             implemented as
                                                                     service
                     system fairly              of a specified
                                                                     commitments
                     presents the               date in
                                                                     and system
                     service                    accordance with
                                                                     requirements
                     organization's             the description
                                                                     were achieved
                     system that                criteria and
                                                                     based on the
                     was designed           ii. the controls         applicable trust
                     and                        stated in the        services
                     implemented                description of       criteria. As part
                     as of a                    the service          of that
                     specified date             organization's       assertion,
                     and                        system were          management
                 ii. the controls               suitability          describes the
                     related to the             designed as of       boundaries of
                     control                    the specified        the system and
                     objectives                 date to provide      the service
                     stated in                  reasonable           organization's
                     management's               assurance that       principal
                     description of             the service          service
                     the service                organization's       commitments
                     organization's             service              and system
                     system were                commitments          requirements.
                     suitability                and system
                                                                  b. A service
                     designed to                requirements
                                                                     auditor's report
                     achieve those              would be
                                                                     on whether
                     control                    achieved based
                                                                     management's
                     objectives as of           on the
                                                                     assertion is
                     the specified              applicable trust
                                                                     fairly stated
                     date                       services criteria
                                                                     based on the
             c. A service auditor's             as of the
                                                                     applicable trust
                report that                     specified date
                                                                     services
                expresses an            c. A service auditor's       criteria.
                opinion on the             report that expresses
                matters in (bi)–(bii)      an opinion on the
                                           matters in (bi)–(bii)

                                                                          (continued)


©2022, AICPA                                                           AAG-SOP APP A
244   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                       SOC 1                      SOC 2                    SOC 3
                    Examination                Examination              Examination
                Components of a           Components of a              N/A
                Type 2 Report             Type 2 Report
                a. Management's           a. The description of the
                   description of the        service organization's
                   service organi-           system
                   zation's system        b. A written assertion
                b. A written assertion       by management of
                   by management of          the service
                   the service               organization about
                   organization about        whether
                   whether, based on           i. the description
                   the criteria,                  of the service
                     i. management's              organization's
                        description of            system presents
                        the service               the service
                        organization's            organization's
                        system fairly             system that was
                        presents the              designed and
                        service                   implemented
                        organization's            throughout the
                        system that               specified period
                        was designed              in accordance
                        and                       with the
                        implemented               description
                        throughout the            criteria,
                        specified             ii. the controls
                        period,                   stated in the
                    ii. the controls              description of
                        related to the            the service
                        control                   organization's
                        objectives                system were
                        stated in                 suitably
                        management's              designed
                        description of            throughout the
                        the service               specified period
                        organization's            to provide
                        system were               reasonable
                        suitably                  assurance that
                        designed                  the service
                        throughout the            organization's
                        specified                 service
                        period to                 commitments
                        achieve those             and system
                        control                   requirements
                        objectives, and           were achieved
                   iii. the controls              based on the
                        related to the            applicable trust
                        control                   services criteria,
                        objectives                and
                        stated in            iii. the controls
                        management's              stated in the
                        description of            description of
                        the service               the service
                        organization'             organization's
                                                  system operated



AAG-SOP APP A                                                           ©2022, AICPA
  Comparison of SOC 1, SOC 2, and SOC 3 Examinations and Related Reports                   245
                       SOC 1                         SOC 2                    SOC 3
                    Examination                   Examination              Examination
                       system operated               the controls
                       effectively                   stated in the
                       throughout the                description of
                       specified period              the service
                       to achieve those              organization's
                       control objectives            system operated
               c. A service auditor's       c. A service auditor's
                  report that                  report that
                    i. expresses an               i. expresses an
                       opinion on the                opinion on the
                       matters in                    matters in
                       (bi)–(biii) and               (bi)–(biii) and
                   ii. includes a                ii. includes a
                       description of the            description of
                       service auditor's             the service
                       tests of the                  auditor's tests of
                       controls and the              controls and the
                       results of those              results of those
                       tests                         tests
Who are the    Management of the            Service organization          Interested parties
intended       service organization,        management and
users of the   user entities during some    specified parties who
report?        or all of the period         have sufficient
               covered by the report (for   knowledge and
               type 2 reports) and user     understanding of
               entities as of a specified   information such as the
               date (for type 1 reports),   following:
               and auditors of the user     •  The nature of the
               entities' financial             service provided by
               statements                      the service
                                               organization
                                            • How the service
                                                organization's system
                                                interacts with user
                                                entities, business
                                                partners, subservice
                                                organizations, and
                                                other parties
                                            • Internal control and
                                                its limitations
                                            • Complementary user
                                                entity controls and
                                                complementary
                                                subservice
                                                organization controls
                                                and how those
                                                controls interact with
                                                the controls at the
                                                service organization
                                                to achieve the service
                                                organization's service
                                                commitments and
                                                system requirements

                                                                                (continued)

©2022, AICPA                                                                AAG-SOP APP A
246   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                       SOC 1                   SOC 2                 SOC 3
                    Examination             Examination           Examination
                                       • User entity
                                         responsibilities and
                                         how they may affect
                                         the user entity's
                                         ability to effectively
                                         use the service
                                         organization's
                                         services
                                       • The applicable trust
                                         services criteria
                                       • The risks that may
                                         threaten the
                                         achievement of the
                                         service organization's
                                         service commitments
                                         and system
                                         requirements and
                                         how controls address
                                         those risks




AAG-SOP APP A                                                     ©2022, AICPA
        Comparison of SOC 2, SOC for Supply Chain, and SOC for Cybersecurity                               247
Appendix B
  Comparison of SOC 2, SOC for Supply Chain,
  and SOC for Cybersecurity Examinations and
  Related Reports
  This appendix is nonauthoritative and is included for informational purposes
  only.
  The following table compares a SOC 2 examination and related report with a
  SOC for Supply Chain examination and a SOC for Cybersecurity examination
  and related reports. Within the columns, certain text is set in bold to highlight
  key distinctions between the three types of examinations and related reports.

                                                              SOC for                    SOC for
                                 SOC 2                     Supply Chain               Cybersecurity
                              Examination1                 Examination                Examination2
   What are the           An organization, or          An entity3 that              Any type of
   types of               segment of an                produces,                    organization
   organizations          organization, that           manufactures, or
   for which an           provides services to         distributes products
   examination            user entities (a
   may be                 service organization)
   performed?
                                                                                             (continued)




        1 For illustrative purposes, this table focuses specifically on a type 2 SOC 2 report, which includes

  an opinion on both the suitability of design and operating effectiveness of controls.
        2 In a SOC 2 examination, when the service organization uses the services of a subservice orga-

  nization, management may elect to use the inclusive method or the carve-out method to address those
  services in the description of its system.
         In the cybersecurity risk management examination, however, entity management is responsible
  for all controls within the entity's cybersecurity risk management program, regardless of whether
  those controls are performed by the entity or by a third party. Therefore, the description criteria for
  use in the cybersecurity risk management examination require the description to address all con-
  trols within the entity's cybersecurity risk management program. AICPA Guide Reporting on an En-
  tity's Cybersecurity Risk Management Program and Controls provides guidance for service auditors
  engaged to examine and report on an entity's cybersecurity risk management program, including
  controls within that program.
        3 If a producer, manufacturer, or distributor bundles the sale of the products with services (for

  instance, installation), the scope of the SOC for Supply Chain examination may also include those ser-
  vices. There are several factors that are considered when determining whether such services would
  best be addressed by a SOC for Supply Chain examination or by a SOC 2 examination. AICPA Guide
  Reporting on an Examination of Controls Relevant to Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confi-
  dentiality, or Privacy in a Production, Manufacturing, or Distribution System (SOC for Supply Chain)
  provides guidance for service auditors engaged to examine and report on a system that produces,
  manufactures, or distributes products, including controls over the system.


  ©2022, AICPA                                                                           AAG-SOP APP B
248   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                                                     SOC for                SOC for
                            SOC 2                 Supply Chain           Cybersecurity
                         Examination              Examination            Examination
   Is the            Generally, the            Generally, the          Generally, the
   examination       examination is            examination is          examination is
   designed to be    performed on a            performed on an         performed on an
   performed at a    system or systems         entity's system or      entity-wide
   system level      that provide services.    systems that produce,   cybersecurity risk
   or at an entity                             manufacture, or         management
   level?                                      distribute products.    program, although
                                                                       the scope may be
                                                                       narrowed to a
                                                                       specific system,
                                                                       business unit, or
                                                                       function of the
                                                                       entity.
   What is the       To provide specified      To provide specified    To provide general
   purpose of the    parties (who have         parties (who have       users with useful
   report?           sufficient knowledge      sufficient knowledge    information about
                     and understanding of      and understanding of    an entity's
                     the service               the entity and its      cybersecurity risk
                     organization and its      system, as discussed    management
                     system as discussed       later) with             program for
                     later) with               information about the   making informed
                     information about         controls within the     decisions
                     controls at the service   entity's system
                     organization relevant     relevant to security,
                     to security,              availability,
                     availability,             processing integrity,
                     processing integrity,     confidentiality, or
                     confidentiality, or       privacy to enable
                     privacy to support        users to better
                     users' evaluations of     understand and
                     their own systems of      manage the risks
                     internal control          arising from business
                                               relationships with
                                               their supplier and
                                               distribution networks
   Who are the       Service organization      Entity management       Entity
   intended          management and            and specified parties   management,
   users?            specified parties who     who have sufficient     directors, and a
                     have sufficient           knowledge and           broad range of
                     knowledge and             understanding of the    general users
                     understanding of the      entity and its system   including analysts,
                     service organization                              investors, and
                     and its system                                    others whose
                                                                       decisions might be
                                                                       affected by the
                                                                       effectiveness of the
                                                                       entity's
                                                                       cybersecurity risk
                                                                       management
                                                                       program




AAG-SOP APP B                                                            ©2022, AICPA
     Comparison of SOC 2, SOC for Supply Chain, and SOC for Cybersecurity                         249
                                                        SOC for                   SOC for
                             SOC 2                   Supply Chain              Cybersecurity
                          Examination                Examination               Examination
 What                 AT-C section 105,          AT-C section 105 and       AT-C section 105
 professional         Concepts Common to         AT-C section 205           and AT-C section
 standards and        All Attestation                                       205
 implementa-          Engagements, and
 tion guidance        AT-C section 205,
 are applicable       Assertion-Based
 to the               Examination
 examination?         Engagements, in
                      AICPA Professional
                      Standards
                      AICPA Guide SOC 2®         AICPA Guide                AICPA Guide
                      Reporting on an            Reporting on an            Reporting on an
                      Examination of             Examination of             Entity's
                      Controls at a Service      Controls Relevant to       Cybersecurity Risk
                      Organization               Security, Availability,    Management
                      Relevant to Security,      Processing Integrity,      Program and
                      Availability,              Confidentiality, or        Controls
                      Processing Integrity,      Privacy in a
                      Confidentiality, or        Production,
                      Privacy                    Manufacturing, or
                                                 Distribution System
                                                 (SOC for Supply
                                                 Chain)
 Who is the           Service organization       Entity management          Entity
 responsible          management                                            management
 party?
 Is the report        Restricted to the use      Restricted to the use      Appropriate for
 appropriate          of the service             of the entity and          general use5
 for general          organization and           specified parties,4
 use or is it         specified parties, such    including the entity's
 restricted to        as user entities of the    business customers
 specified            system throughout          and business
 parties?             some or all of the         partners, accountants
                      period, business           providing services to
                      partners subject to        such business
                      risks arising from         customers and
                      interactions with the      business partners,
                      system, practitioners      and prospective
                      providing services to      business customers
                      such user entities and     and business partners
                      business partners,         who have sufficient
                      prospective user           knowledge and
                      entities and business      understanding of the
                      partners, and              following:
                                                                                     (continued)



     4 Specified parties and the knowledge and understanding they are expected to have are described

in more detail in chapter 1, "Introduction and Background," beginning at paragraph 1.07.
     5 The term general use describes reports whose use is not restricted to specified parties. Nev-

ertheless, as discussed in chapter 4, "Forming the Opinion and Preparing the Practitioner's Report,"
of AICPA Guide Reporting on an Entity's Cybersecurity Risk Management Program and Controls,
practitioners may decide to restrict the use of their report to specified parties.


©2022, AICPA                                                                     AAG-SOP APP B
250   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                                                      SOC for              SOC for
                            SOC 2                  Supply Chain         Cybersecurity
                         Examination               Examination          Examination
                   regulators who have          • The nature of the
                   sufficient knowledge           goods produced,
                   and understanding of           manufactured, or
                   the following:                 distributed by the
                   •  The nature of the           entity
                      service provided by       • Internal control
                      the service                 and its limitations
                      organization
                                                • The applicable
                   • How the service              trust services
                       organization's             criteria
                       system interacts
                       with user entities,
                                                • The risks that may
                                                  threaten the
                       business partners,
                                                  achievement of the
                       subservice
                                                  entity's principal
                       organizations, and
                                                  system objectives
                       other parties
                                                  and how controls
                   • Internal control and         address those risks
                       its limitations
                   • Complementary user
                       entity controls and
                       complementary
                       subservice
                       organization controls
                       and how those
                       controls interact
                       with the controls at
                       the service
                       organization to
                       achieve the service
                       organization's
                       service commitments
                       and system
                       requirements
                   • User entity
                       responsibilities and
                       how they may affect
                       the user entity's
                       ability to effectively
                       use the service
                       organization's
                       services
                   • The applicable trust
                       services criteria
                   • The risks that may
                       threaten the
                       achievement of the
                       service
                       organization's
                       service commitments
                       and system
                       requirements, and
                       how controls address
                       those risks



AAG-SOP APP B                                                           ©2022, AICPA
      Comparison of SOC 2, SOC for Supply Chain, and SOC for Cybersecurity                           251
                                                         SOC for                    SOC for
                              SOC 2                   Supply Chain               Cybersecurity
                           Examination                Examination                Examination
What is the           The description of the      The description of the      The description of
subject matter        service organization's      entity's production,        the entity's
of                    system based on the         manufacturing, or           cybersecurity risk
management's          description criteria        distribution system         management
assertion and                                     based on the                program based on
the                                               description criteria        the description
examination?                                                                  criteria
                      Suitability of design       Whether the controls        The effectiveness
                      and operating               stated in the               of controls within
                      effectiveness of            description, which are      that program to
                      controls stated in the      necessary to provide        achieve the entity's
                      description to provide      reasonable assurance        cybersecurity
                      reasonable assurance        that the entity             objectives based on
                      that the service            achieved its principal      the control criteria
                      organization's service      system objectives,
                      commitments and             were effective6
                      system requirements         throughout the
                      were achieved based         period, based on the
                      on the applicable           applicable trust
                      trust services criteria     services criteria
                      relevant to security,       relevant to security,
                      availability,               availability,
                      processing integrity,       processing integrity,
                      confidentiality, or         confidentiality, or
                      privacy                     privacy
What are the          The criteria for the        The criteria for the        The criteria for a
criteria for the      description of a            description of an           description of an
examination?          service organization's      entity's system in DC       entity's
                      system in DC section        section 300, 2020           cybersecurity risk
                      200, 2018 Description       Description Criteria        management
                      Criteria for a              for a Description of an     program in DC
                      Description of a            Entity's Production,        section 100,
                      Service                     Manufacturing, or           Description
                      Organization's              Distribution System         Criteria for
                      System in a SOC 2®          in a SOC for Supply         Management's
                      Report (With Revised        Chain Report, in            Description of an
                      Implementation              AICPA Description           Entity's
                      Guidance — 2022), in        Criteria                    Cybersecurity Risk
                      AICPA Description                                       Management
                      Criteria                                                Program, in AICPA
                                                                              Description
                                                                              Criteria
                                                                                       (continued)




  6    Effective controls are those that are both suitably designed and operating effectively.


©2022, AICPA                                                                       AAG-SOP APP B
252   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

                                                          SOC for                    SOC for
                               SOC 2                   Supply Chain               Cybersecurity
                            Examination                Examination                Examination
                        TSP section 100, 2017       TSP section 100 in          The trust services
                        Trust Services              AICPA Trust Services        criteria for
                        Criteria for Security,      Criteria contains the       security,
                        Availability,               criteria for evaluating     availability, and
                        Processing Integrity,       the effectiveness of        confidentiality
                        Confidentiality, and        controls (applicable        included in TSP
                        Privacy (With Revised       trust services criteria).   section 100 in
                        Points of Focus —                                       AICPA Trust
                        2022), in AICPA Trust                                   Services Criteria
                        Services Criteria,                                      are suitable for use
                        contains the criteria                                   as control criteria.7
                        for evaluating the
                        design and operating
                        effectiveness of
                        controls (applicable
                        trust services criteria).
   What are the         A description of the        A description of the        A description of the
   contents of the      service organization's      entity's production,        entity's
   report?              system                      manufacturing, or           cybersecurity risk
                                                    distribution system         management
                                                                                program
                        A written assertion by      A written assertion by      A written assertion
                        service organization        entity management           by entity
                        management about            about whether (a) the       management about
                        whether (a) the             description of the          whether (a) the
                        description of the          entity's system was         description of the
                        service organization's      presented in                entity's
                        system was presented        accordance with the         cybersecurity risk
                        in accordance with          description criteria        management
                        the description             and (b) the controls        program was
                        criteria and (b) the        stated in the               presented in
                        controls stated in the      description, which are      accordance with
                        description were            necessary to provide        the description
                        suitably designed and       reasonable assurance        criteria and (b)
                        operating effectively       that the entity             controls within the
                        to provide reasonable       achieved its principal      program were
                        assurance that the          system objectives,          effective in
                        service organization's      were effective based        achieving the
                        service commitments         on the applicable           entity's
                        and system                  trust services criteria     cybersecurity
                        requirements were                                       objectives based on
                        achieved based on the                                   the control criteria
                        applicable trust
                        services criteria




      7 For both the description criteria and control criteria in a cybersecurity risk management ex-

  amination, suitable criteria other than those outlined in this appendix may also be used.


AAG-SOP APP B                                                                     ©2022, AICPA
      Comparison of SOC 2, SOC for Supply Chain, and SOC for Cybersecurity                      253
                                                         SOC for                   SOC for
                             SOC 2                    Supply Chain              Cybersecurity
                          Examination                 Examination               Examination
                      A service auditor's8        A practitioner's report    A practitioner's
                      report that contains        that contains an           report that
                      an opinion about            opinion about              contains an opinion
                      whether (a) the             whether (a) the            about whether (a)
                      description of the          description of the         the description of
                      service organization's      entity's system was        the entity's
                      system was presented        presented in               cybersecurity risk
                      in accordance with          accordance with the        management
                      the description             description criteria       program was
                      criteria and (b) the        and (b) the controls       presented in
                      controls stated in the      stated in the              accordance with
                      description were            description, which are     the description
                      suitably designed and       necessary to provide       criteria and (b) the
                      operating effectively       reasonable assurance       controls within
                      to provide reasonable       that the entity            that program were
                      assurance that the          achieved its principal     effective in
                      service organization's      system objectives,         achieving the
                      service commitments         were effective based       entity's
                      and system                  on the applicable          cybersecurity
                      requirements were           trust services criteria    objectives based on
                      achieved based on the                                  the control criteria
                      applicable trust
                      services criteria
                      A description of the        A description of the
                      service auditor's tests     practitioner's tests of
                      of controls and the         controls and the
                      results of the tests        results of the tests




  8    The practitioner in a SOC 2 examination is referred to as a service auditor.


©2022, AICPA                                                                      AAG-SOP APP B
                                    Appendix C                                  255
Appendix C

   Appendix C-1        Illustrative Management Assertion and Service
                       Auditor’s Report for a Type 2 Examination
                       (Carved-Out Controls of a Subservice
                       Organization and Complementary Subservice
                       Organization Controls and Complementary User
                       Entity Controls)
   Appendix C-2        Illustrative Service Organization and Subservice
                       Organization Management Assertions and
                       Service Auditor’s Report for a Type 2 Examination
                       (Subservice Organization Presented Using the
                       Inclusive Method and Complementary User Entity
                       Controls)
   Appendix C-3        Illustrative Service Auditor’s Report for a Type 2
                       Examination in Which the Service Auditor
                       Disclaims an Opinion Because of a Scope
                       Limitation

  An illustrative type 2 report that includes the description of the system in ad-
  dition to management's assertion and the service auditor's report is available
  on the AICPA website.




  ©2022, AICPA                                                     AAG-SOP APP C
             Illustrative Management Assertion and Service Auditor’s Report                       257
Appendix C-1
  Illustrative Management Assertion and
  Service Auditor’s Report for a Type 2
  Examination (Carved-Out Controls
  of a Subservice Organization and
  Complementary Subservice Organization
  Controls and Complementary User
  Entity Controls)
  This appendix is nonauthoritative and is included for informational purposes
  only.
  In the following illustrative management assertion and service auditor's report,
  XYZ Service Organization has engaged the service auditor to examine and report
  on the description of the service organization's medical claims processing sys-
  tem and the suitability of design and operating effectiveness of controls relevant
  to security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy to pro-
  vide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commitments
  and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services
  criteria. The example assumes that XYZ Service Organization outsources cer-
  tain aspects of its system to a subservice organization and has elected to use the
  carve-out method for the subservice organization. In addition, complementary
  user entity and complementary subservice organization controls are required for
  XYZ Service Organization to achieve certain service commitments and system
  requirements based on the applicable trust services criteria. Language that has
  been added to the illustrative management assertion and to the service auditor's
  report to reflect the use of the carve-out method and the need for complemen-
  tary user entity controls and complementary subservice organization controls is
  shown in boldface italics.
        Illustrative Assertion by Service Organization Management
                      [XYZ Service Organization’s Letterhead]
             Assertion of XYZ Service Organization Management
  We have prepared the accompanying description of XYZ Service Organization's
  (XYZ's) medical claims processing system titled "XYZ Service Organization's
  Description of its Medical Claims Processing System" throughout the period
  January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, (description) based on the criteria for
  a description of a service organization's system in DC section 200, 2018 Descrip-
  tion Criteria for a Description of a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2®
  Report, in AICPA Description Criteria (description criteria).1 The description


       1 The 2018 description criteria are codified as DC section 200, 2018 Description Criteria for

  a Description of a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2® Report (With Revised Implementation
  Guidance — 2022), in AICPA Description Criteria. As implementation guidance may be updated with-
  out changes to criteria, service organization management and the service auditor should review the
  most current version of DC section 200 for the most up-to-date guidance.


  ©2022, AICPA                                                                 AAG-SOP APP C-1
258   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  is intended to provide report users with information about the medical claims
  processing system that may be useful when assessing the risks arising from in-
  teractions with XYZ's system, particularly information about system controls
  that XYZ has designed, implemented, and operated to provide reasonable as-
  surance that its service commitments and system requirements were achieved
  based on the trust services criteria relevant to security, availability, process-
  ing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy (applicable trust services criteria) set
  forth in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availabil-
  ity, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy, in AICPA Trust Services
  Criteria.2
  XYZ uses a subservice organization to provide application mainte-
  nance and support services. The description indicates that comple-
  mentary subservice organization controls that are suitably designed
  and operating effectively are necessary, along with controls at XYZ, to
  achieve XYZ’s service commitments and system requirements based on
  the applicable trust services criteria. The description presents XYZ’s
  controls, the applicable trust services criteria, and the types of com-
  plementary subservice organization controls assumed in the design of
  XYZ’s controls. The description does not disclose the actual controls at
  the subservice organization.
  The description indicates that complementary user entity controls that
  are suitably designed and operating effectively are necessary, along
  with controls at XYZ, to achieve XYZ’s service commitments and sys-
  tem requirements based on the applicable trust services criteria. The
  description presents XYZ’s controls, the applicable trust services crite-
  ria, and the complementary user entity controls assumed in the design
  of XYZ’s controls.
  We confirm, to the best of our knowledge and belief, that
            a. the description presents XYZ's medical claims processing system
               that was designed and implemented throughout the period January
               1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, in accordance with the description
               criteria.
            b. the controls stated in the description were suitably designed
               throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to
               provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and
               system requirements would be achieved based on the applicable
               trust services criteria, if its controls operated effectively through-
               out that period, and if the subservice organization and user
               entities applied the complementary controls assumed in the
               design of XYZ’s controls throughout that period.
            c. the controls stated in the description operated effectively through-
               out the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to provide
               reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
               requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services
               criteria if complementary subservice organization controls


       2 The 2017 trust services criteria are codified in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria

  for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy (With Revised Points of
  Focus — 2022), in AICPA Trust Services Criteria. As points of focus may be updated without changes
  to criteria, service organization management and the service auditor should review the most current
  version of TSP section 100 for the most up-to-date guidance.


AAG-SOP APP C-1                                                                   ©2022, AICPA
           Illustrative Management Assertion and Service Auditor’s Report                              259
               and complementary user entity controls assumed in the de-
               sign of XYZ’s controls operated effectively throughout that
               period.
         Illustrative Independent Service Auditor's Type 2 Report
    Independent Service Auditor's Report on a SOC 2 Examination3
To: Management of XYZ Service Organization
Scope
We have examined XYZ Service Organization's (XYZ's) accompanying descrip-
tion of its medical claims processing system titled "XYZ Service Organization's
Description of its Medical Claims Processing System" throughout the period
January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX,4 (description) based on the criteria for
a description of a service organization's system in DC section 200, 2018 Descrip-
tion Criteria for a Description of a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2®
Report, in AICPA Description Criteria, (description criteria) and the suitability
of the design and operating effectiveness of controls stated in the description
throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to provide rea-
sonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system requirements
were achieved based on the trust services criteria relevant to security, availabil-
ity, processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy (applicable trust services
criteria) set forth in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security,
Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy, in AICPA Trust
Services Criteria.5
XYZ uses a subservice organization to provide application mainte-
nance and support services. The description indicates that comple-
mentary subservice organization controls that are suitably designed
and operating effectively are necessary, along with controls at XYZ, to
achieve XYZ’s service commitments and system requirements based on
the applicable trust services criteria. The description presents XYZ’s
controls, the applicable trust services criteria, and the types of com-
plementary subservice organization controls assumed in the design of
XYZ’s controls. The description does not disclose the actual controls at
the subservice organization. Our examination did not include the ser-
vices provided by the subservice organization, and we have not evalu-
ated the suitability of the design or operating effectiveness of such com-
plementary subservice organization controls.



    3   The report may also be titled "Report of Independent Service Auditors."
    4   The title of the description of the service organization's system in the service auditor's report
should be the same as the title used by service organization management in its description of the
service organization's system.
     5 A statement such as the following is added to the service auditor's report when information

that is not covered by the report is included in the description of the service organization's system:
           The information included in section X, "Other Information Provided by XYZ Service Or-
           ganization That Is Not Covered by the Service Auditor's Report," is presented by XYZ
           management to provide additional information and is not a part of XYZ's description. In-
           formation about XYZ's [describe the nature of the information, for example, planned sys-
           tem changes] has not been subjected to the procedures applied in the examination of the
           description and of the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls to
           achieve XYZ's service commitments and system requirements based on the applicable trust
           services criteria, and accordingly, we express no opinion on it.


©2022, AICPA                                                                      AAG-SOP APP C-1
260   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  The description indicates that complementary user entity controls that
  are suitably designed and operating effectively are necessary, along
  with controls at XYZ, to achieve XYZ’s service commitments and sys-
  tem requirements based on the applicable trust services criteria. The
  description presents XYZ’s controls, the applicable trust services crite-
  ria, and the complementary user entity controls assumed in the design
  of XYZ’s controls. Our examination did not include such complemen-
  tary user entity controls and we have not evaluated the suitability of
  the design or operating effectiveness of such controls.
  Service Organization's Responsibilities
  XYZ is responsible for its service commitments and system requirements and
  for designing, implementing, and operating effective controls within the system
  to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
  requirements were achieved. XYZ has provided the accompanying assertion ti-
  tled "Assertion of XYZ Service Organization Management" (assertion) about
  the description and the suitability of design and operating effectiveness of con-
  trols stated therein. XYZ is also responsible for preparing the description and
  assertion, including the completeness, accuracy, and method of presentation of
  the description and assertion; providing the services covered by the description;
  selecting the applicable trust services criteria and stating the related controls
  in the description; and identifying the risks that threaten the achievement of
  the service organization's service commitments and system requirements.
  Service Auditor's Responsibilities
  Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the description and on the suit-
  ability of design and operating effectiveness of controls stated in the description
  based on our examination. Our examination was conducted in accordance with
  attestation standards established by the AICPA. Those standards require that
  we plan and perform our examination to obtain reasonable assurance about
  whether, in all material respects, the description is presented in accordance
  with the description criteria and the controls stated therein were suitably de-
  signed and operated effectively to provide reasonable assurance that the service
  organization's service commitments and system requirements were achieved
  based on the applicable trust services criteria. We believe that the evidence
  we obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a reasonable basis for our
  opinion.
  We are required to be independent and to meet our other ethical responsibilities
  in accordance with relevant ethical requirements relating to the engagement.
  An examination of the description of a service organization's system and the
  suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls involves the
  following:
           • Obtaining   an understanding of the system and the service orga-
             nization's service commitments and system requirements
           • Assessing   the risks that the description is not presented in ac-
             cordance with the description criteria and that controls were not
               suitably designed or did not operate effectively
           •   Performing procedures to obtain evidence about whether the de-
               scription is presented in accordance with the description criteria
           •   Performing procedures to obtain evidence about whether controls
               stated in the description were suitably designed to provide reason-
               able assurance that the service organization achieved its service

AAG-SOP APP C-1                                                    ©2022, AICPA
          Illustrative Management Assertion and Service Auditor’s Report        261
              commitments and system requirements based on the applicable
              trust services criteria
          •   Testing the operating effectiveness of controls stated in the de-
              scription to provide reasonable assurance that the service orga-
              nization achieved its service commitments and system require-
              ments based on the applicable trust services criteria
          •   Evaluating the overall presentation of the description
Our examination also included performing such other procedures as we consid-
ered necessary in the circumstances.
Inherent Limitations
The description is prepared to meet the common needs of a broad range of report
users and may not, therefore, include every aspect of the system that individual
users may consider important to meet their informational needs.
There are inherent limitations in the effectiveness of any system of inter-
nal control, including the possibility of human error and the circumvention of
controls.
Because of their nature, controls may not always operate effectively to provide
reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commitments and
system requirements are achieved based on the applicable trust services crite-
ria. Also, the projection to the future of any conclusions about the suitability
of the design and operating effectiveness of controls is subject to the risk that
controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions or that the
degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Description of Tests of Controls
The specific controls we tested and the nature, timing, and results of those tests
are listed in section XX.
Opinion
In our opinion, in all material respects,
        a. the description presents XYZ's medical claims processing system
           that was designed and implemented throughout the period January
           1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, in accordance with the description
           criteria.
        b. the controls stated in the description were suitably designed
           throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to
           provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and
           system requirements would be achieved based on the applicable
           trust services criteria, if its controls operated effectively through-
           out that period and if the subservice organization and user
           entities applied the complementary controls assumed in the
           design of XYZ’s controls throughout that period.
          c. the controls stated in the description operated effectively through-
             out the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to provide
             reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
             requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services
             criteria if complementary subservice organization controls
             and complementary user entity controls assumed in the de-
             sign of XYZ’s controls operated effectively throughout that
             period.

©2022, AICPA                                                    AAG-SOP APP C-1
262   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  Restricted Use
  This report, including the description of tests of controls and results thereof in
  section XX, is intended solely for the information and use of XYZ, user entities
  of XYZ's medical claims processing system during some or all of the period Jan-
  uary 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, business partners of XYZ subject to risks
  arising from interactions with the medical claims processing system, practition-
  ers providing services to such user entities and business partners, prospective
  user entities and business partners, and regulators who have sufficient knowl-
  edge and understanding of the following:
          • The nature of the service provided by the service organization
          • How  the service organization's system interacts with user entities,
            business partners, subservice organizations, and other parties
          • Internal control and its limitations
          • Complementary       user entity controls and complementary
            subservice organization controls and how those controls
               interact with the controls at the service organization to
               achieve the service organization’s service commitments and
               system requirements
          •    User entity responsibilities and how they may affect the user en-
               tity's ability to effectively use the service organization's services
          •    The applicable trust services criteria
          •    The risks that may threaten the achievement of the service or-
               ganization's service commitments and system requirements and
               how controls address those risks
  This report is not intended to be, and should not be, used by anyone other than
  these specified parties.
  [Service auditor's signature]
  [City and state where the report is issued]
  [Date of the service auditor's report]




AAG-SOP APP C-1                                                   ©2022, AICPA
              Illustrative Service Organization and Subservice Organization                       263
Appendix C-2
  Illustrative Service Organization and
  Subservice Organization Management
  Assertions and Service Auditor’s Report for a
  Type 2 Examination (Subservice Organization
  Presented Using the Inclusive Method and
  Complementary User Entity Controls)
  This appendix is nonauthoritative and is included for informational purposes
  only.
  In the following illustrative management assertions and service auditor's re-
  port, XYZ Service Organization has engaged the service auditor to examine and
  report on the description of the service organization's medical claims processing
  system and its controls relevant to security, availability, processing integrity,
  confidentiality, and privacy to provide reasonable assurance that the service or-
  ganization's service commitments and system requirements were achieved based
  on the applicable trust services criteria. The example assumes that XYZ Service
  Organization outsources certain aspects of its system to a subservice organiza-
  tion and has elected to use the inclusive method for the subservice organization.
  In addition, it assumes that service organization management has designed the
  controls that it expects the subservice organization to implement and operate.
  The example also assumes that complementary user entity controls are neces-
  sary to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and sys-
  tem requirements are achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.
  Language that has been added to the illustrative service organization manage-
  ment assertion and to the service auditor's report to reflect the use of the inclusive
  method and the need for complementary user entity controls is shown in bold-
  face italics.
        Illustrative Assertion by Service Organization Management
                      [XYZ Service Organization’s Letterhead]
              Assertion of XYZ Service Organization Management
  We have prepared the accompanying description of XYZ Service Organization's
  (XYZ's) medical claims processing system titled "XYZ Service Organization's
  Description of its Medical Claims Processing System" throughout the period
  January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, (description) based on the criteria for
  a description of a service organization's system in DC section 200, 2018 Descrip-
  tion Criteria for a Description of a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2®
  Report, in AICPA Description Criteria (description criteria).1 The description
  is intended to provide report users with information about the medical claims


       1 The 2018 description criteria are codified as DC section 200, 2018 Description Criteria for

  a Description of a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2® Report (With Revised Implementation
  Guidance — 2022), in AICPA Description Criteria. As implementation guidance may be updated with-
  out changes to criteria, service organization management and the service auditor should review the
  most current version of DC section 200 for the most up-to-date guidance.


  ©2022, AICPA                                                                 AAG-SOP APP C-2
264   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  processing system that may be useful when assessing the risks arising from in-
  teractions with XYZ's system, particularly information about system controls
  that XYZ has designed, implemented, and operated to provide reasonable as-
  surance that its service commitments and system requirements were achieved
  based on the trust services criteria relevant to security, availability, process-
  ing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy (applicable trust services criteria) set
  forth in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availabil-
  ity, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy, in AICPA Trust Services
  Criteria.2
  XYZ uses ABC Subservice Organization (ABC) to provide application
  maintenance and support services. XYZ’s description includes a de-
  scription of ABC’s application maintenance and support services used
  by XYZ to process transactions for user entities and business partners,
  including the controls of XYZ and the controls designed by XYZ and
  operated by ABC that are necessary, in combination with controls at
  XYZ, for XYZ to achieve its service commitments and system require-
  ments based on the applicable trust services criteria. ABC’s assertion is
  presented on page XX in section YY.
  The description indicates that complementary user entity controls that
  are suitably designed and operating effectively are necessary, along
  with controls at XYZ, to achieve XYZ’s service commitments and sys-
  tem requirements based on the applicable trust services criteria. The
  description presents XYZ’s controls, the applicable trust services crite-
  ria, and the complementary user entity controls assumed in the design
  of XYZ’s controls.
  We confirm, to the best of our knowledge and belief, that
            a. the description presents XYZ's medical claims processing system
               that was designed and implemented throughout the period January
               1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, in accordance with the description
               criteria.
            b. the controls stated in the description, including the controls de-
               signed by XYZ and operated by ABC, were suitably designed
               throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to
               provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and
               system requirements would be achieved based on the applicable
               trust services criteria if its controls operated effectively through-
               out that period and if user entities applied the complementary
               controls assumed in the design of XYZ’s controls throughout
               that period.
            c. the controls stated in the description, including the controls de-
               signed by XYZ and operated by ABC, operated effectively through-
               out the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to provide
               reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
               requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services
               criteria if complementary user entity controls assumed in the


       2 The 2017 trust services criteria are codified in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria

  for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy (With Revised Points of
  Focus — 2022). As points of focus may be updated without changes to criteria, service organization
  management and the service auditor should review the most current version of TSP section 100 for
  the most up-to-date guidance.


AAG-SOP APP C-2                                                                   ©2022, AICPA
             Illustrative Service Organization and Subservice Organization                   265
           design of XYZ’s controls operated effectively throughout that
           period.
   Illustrative Assertion by Subservice Organization Management
                   [ABC Subservice Organization’s Letterhead]
          Assertion of ABC Subservice Organization Management
ABC Subservice Organization (ABC) provides application maintenance and
support services to XYZ Service Organization (XYZ). The services provided by
ABC are part of XYZ's medical claims processing system. We have prepared the
portion of the accompanying description of XYZ Service Organization's medical
claims processing system titled "XYZ Service Organization's Description of Its
Medical Claims Processing System" throughout the period January 1, 20XX,
to December 31, 20XX, (description) disclosing ABC's application maintenance
and support services provided to XYZ based on the criteria for a description
of a service organization's system in DC section 200, 2018 Description Crite-
ria for a Description of a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2® Report, in
AICPA Description Criteria (description criteria). The description is intended
to provide report users with information about XYZ's medical claims process-
ing system that may be useful when assessing the risks arising from interac-
tions with XYZ's system, particularly information about system controls that
XYZ has designed, implemented, and operated to provide reasonable assurance
that its service commitments and system requirements were achieved based on
the trust services criteria relevant to security, availability, processing integrity,
confidentiality, and privacy (applicable trust services criteria) set forth in TSP
section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing
Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy, in AICPA Trust Services Criteria.
We confirm, to the best of our knowledge and belief, that
           a. the description presents ABC's application maintenance and sup-
              port services made available to XYZ throughout the period January
              1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, in accordance with the description
              criteria.
          b. ABC's controls stated in the description, which were designed
              by XYZ, operated as described throughout the period January 1,
              20XX, to December 31, 20XX, based on the applicable trust services
              criteria.
         Illustrative Independent Service Auditor's Type 2 Report
   Independent Service Auditor's Report on a SOC 2 Examination3
To: Management of XYZ Service Organization
Scope
We have examined XYZ Service Organization's (XYZ's) accompanying descrip-
tion of its medical claims processing system, including application mainte-
nance and support services provided by and controls operated by ABC
Subservice Organization (ABC), titled "XYZ Service Organization's Descrip-
tion of Its Medical Claims Processing System" throughout the period January
1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, (description) based on the criteria for a descrip-
tion of a service organization's system in DC section 200, 2018 Description Cri-
teria for a Description of a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2® Report,


    3   The report may also be titled "Report of Independent Service Auditors."


©2022, AICPA                                                                      AAG-SOP APP C-2
266   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  in AICPA Description Criteria, (description criteria) and the suitability of the
  design and operating effectiveness of XYZ's controls, including the controls
  designed by XYZ and operated by ABC, stated in the description throughout
  the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to provide reasonable assur-
  ance that XYZ's service commitments and system requirements were achieved
  based on the trust services criteria relevant to security, availability, process-
  ing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy (applicable trust services criteria) set
  forth in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availabil-
  ity, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy, in AICPA Trust Services
  Criteria.

  ABC is an independent subservice organization providing application
  maintenance and support services to XYZ. The description includes
  those elements of the application maintenance and support services
  provided to XYZ and the controls designed by XYZ and operated by ABC
  that are necessary for XYZ to achieve its service commitments and sys-
  tem requirements based on the applicable trust services criteria.

  The description indicates that complementary user entity controls that
  are suitably designed and operating effectively are necessary, along
  with controls at XYZ, to achieve XYZ’s service commitments and sys-
  tem requirements based on the applicable trust services criteria. The
  description presents XYZ’s controls, the applicable trust services crite-
  ria, and the complementary user entity controls assumed in the design
  of XYZ’s controls. Our examination did not include such complemen-
  tary user entity controls and we have not evaluated the suitability of
  the design or operating effectiveness of such controls.

  Service Organization's Responsibilities

  XYZ is responsible for its service commitments and system requirements and
  for designing, implementing, and operating effective controls within the system
  to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
  requirements were achieved. XYZ has provided the accompanying assertion ti-
  tled "Assertion of XYZ Service Organization Management" (assertion) about
  the description and the suitability of design and operating effectiveness of con-
  trols stated therein. XYZ is also responsible for preparing the description and
  assertion, including the completeness, accuracy, and method of presentation of
  the description and assertion; providing the services covered by the description;
  selecting the applicable trust services criteria and stating the related controls
  in the description; and identifying the risks that threaten the achievement of
  the service organization's service commitments and system requirements.

  Subservice Organization’s Responsibilities

  ABC has provided the accompanying assertion titled "Assertion of
  ABC Subservice Organization Management" (ABC assertion) about the
  description and the controls stated therein. ABC is responsible for
  preparing the portion of the description related to the application
  maintenance and support services provided to XYZ and the ABC asser-
  tion, including the completeness, accuracy, and method of presentation
  of the description and assertion; providing the services covered by the
  description; and implementing, operating, and documenting controls
  designed by XYZ, which enable XYZ to achieve its service commitments
  and system requirements.

AAG-SOP APP C-2                                                     ©2022, AICPA
          Illustrative Service Organization and Subservice Organization          267
Service Auditor's Responsibilities
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the description and on the suit-
ability of design and operating effectiveness of controls stated in the description
based on our examination. Our examination was conducted in accordance with
attestation standards established by the AICPA. Those standards require that
we plan and perform our examination to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether, in all material respects, the description is presented in accordance
with the description criteria and the controls stated therein were suitably de-
signed and operated effectively to provide reasonable assurance that the service
organization's service commitments and system requirements were achieved
based on the applicable trust services criteria. We believe that the evidence
we obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a reasonable basis for our
opinion.
We are required to be independent and to meet our other ethical responsibilities
in accordance with relevant ethical requirements relating to the engagement.
An examination of the description of a service organization's system and the
suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls involves the
following:
         • Obtaining   an understanding of the system and the service orga-
           nization's service commitments and system requirements
         • Assessing   the risks that the description is not presented in ac-
           cordance with the description criteria and that controls were not
             suitably designed or did not operate effectively
         •   Performing procedures to obtain evidence about whether the de-
             scription is presented in accordance with the description criteria
         •   Performing procedures to obtain evidence about whether controls
             stated in the description were suitably designed to provide reason-
             able assurance that the service organization achieved its service
             commitments and system requirements based the applicable trust
             services criteria
         •   Testing the operating effectiveness of controls stated in the de-
             scription to provide reasonable assurance that the service orga-
             nization achieved its service commitments and system require-
             ments based on the applicable trust services criteria
         •   Evaluating the overall presentation of the description
Our examination also included performing such other procedures as we consid-
ered necessary in the circumstances.
Inherent Limitations
The description is prepared to meet the common needs of a broad range of report
users and may not, therefore, include every aspect of the system that individual
users may consider important to meet their informational needs.
There are inherent limitations in the effectiveness of any system of inter-
nal control, including the possibility of human error and the circumvention of
controls.
Because of their nature, controls may not always operate effectively to provide
reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commitments and
system requirements are achieved based on the applicable trust services crite-
ria. Also, the projection to the future of any conclusions about the suitability
of the design and operating effectiveness of controls is subject to the risk that

©2022, AICPA                                                     AAG-SOP APP C-2
268   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions or that the
  degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
  Description of Tests of Controls
  The specific controls we tested and the nature, timing, and results of those tests
  are listed in section XX.
  Opinion
  In our opinion, in all material respects,
          a. the description presents XYZ's medical claims processing system
             that was designed and implemented throughout the period January
             1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, in accordance with the description
             criteria.
          b. the controls stated in the description, including the controls de-
             signed by XYZ and operated by ABC, were suitably designed
             throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to
             provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and
             system requirements would be achieved based on the applicable
             trust services criteria if its controls operated effectively throughout
             that period and if the user entities applied the complementary
             controls assumed in the design of XYZ’s controls throughout
             that period.
            c. the controls stated in the description, including the controls de-
               signed by XYZ and operated by ABC, operated effectively through-
               out the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to provide
               reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
               requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services
               criteria if complimentary user entity controls assumed in the
               design of XYZ’s controls operated effectively throughout that
               period.
  Restricted Use
  This report, including the description of tests of controls and results thereof in
  section XX, is intended solely for the information and use of XYZ, user entities
  of XYZ's medical claims processing system during some or all of the period Jan-
  uary 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, business partners of XYZ subject to risks
  arising from interactions with the medical claims processing system, practition-
  ers providing services to such user entities and business partners, prospective
  user entities and business partners, and regulators who have sufficient knowl-
  edge and understanding of the following:

            • The nature of the service provided by the service organization
            • How  the service organization's system interacts with user entities,
              business partners, subservice organizations, and other parties
            • Internal control and its limitations
            • Complementary       user entity controls and complementary
              subservice organization controls and how those controls
                interact with the controls at the service organization to
                achieve the service organization’s service commitments and
                system requirements
            •   User entity responsibilities and how they may affect the user en-
                tity's ability to effectively use the service organization's services

AAG-SOP APP C-2                                                    ©2022, AICPA
          Illustrative Service Organization and Subservice Organization      269
        • The applicable trust services criteria
        • The risks that may threaten the achievement of the service or-
          ganization's service commitments and system requirements and
             how controls address those risks
This report is not intended to be, and should not be, used by anyone other than
these specified parties.
[Service auditor's signature]
[City and state where the report is issued]
[Date of the service auditor's report]




©2022, AICPA                                                   AAG-SOP APP C-2
              Illustrative Service Auditor’s Report for a Type 2 Examination                      271
Appendix C-3
  Illustrative Service Auditor’s Report for a
  Type 2 Examination in Which the Service
  Auditor Disclaims an Opinion Because of a
  Scope Limitation
  This appendix is nonauthoritative and is included for informational purposes
  only.
  In the following illustrative service auditor's report, XYZ Service Organization
  has engaged the service auditor to examine and report on the description of the
  service organization's medical claims processing system and the controls rele-
  vant to security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy,
  which XYZ designed, implemented, and operated to provide reasonable assur-
  ance that the service organization's service commitments and system require-
  ments were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria. The example
  assumes that XYZ Service Organization management refused to provide writ-
  ten representations at the end of the examination. Because of that limitation on
  the scope of the engagement, the service auditor decided to disclaim an opin-
  ion about whether the description presents XYZ Service Organization's medical
  claims processing system that was designed and implemented in accordance
  with the description criteria and about whether the controls included in the de-
  scription were suitability designed and operated effectively to provide reason-
  able assurance that the service organization's service commitments and system
  requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.
          Illustrative Independent Service Auditor's Type 2 Report
     Independent Service Auditor's Report on a SOC 2 Examination1
  To: Management of XYZ Service Organization
  We were engaged to examine XYZ Service Organization's (XYZ's) accompany-
  ing description of its medical claims processing system titled "XYZ Service Or-
  ganization's Description of Its Medical Claims Processing System" throughout
  the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, (description) based on the
  criteria for a description of a service organization's system in DC section 200,
  2018 Description Criteria for a Description of a Service Organization's System
  in a SOC 2® Report, in AICPA Description Criteria, (description criteria)2 and
  the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls stated in
  the description throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX,
  to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
  requirements were achieved based on the trust services criteria relevant to se-
  curity, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy (applicable
  trust services criteria) set forth in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria


      1  The report may also be titled "Report of Independent Service Auditors."
      2  The 2018 description criteria are codified as DC section 200, 2018 Description Criteria for
  a Description of a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2® Report (With Revised Implementation
  Guidance — 2022), in AICPA Description Criteria. As implementation guidance may be updated with-
  out changes to criteria, service organization management and the service auditor should review the
  most current version of DC section 200 for the most up-to-date guidance.


  ©2022, AICPA                                                                 AAG-SOP APP C-3
272   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy, in
  AICPA Trust Services Criteria.3
  XYZ is responsible for its service commitments and system requirements and
  for designing, implementing, and operating effective controls within the system
  to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
  requirements were achieved. XYZ has provided the accompanying assertion ti-
  tled "Assertion of XYZ Service Organization Management" (assertion) about
  the description and the suitability of design and operating effectiveness of con-
  trols stated therein. XYZ is also responsible for preparing the description and
  assertion, including the completeness, accuracy, and method of presentation of
  the description and assertion; providing the services covered by the description;
  selecting the applicable trust services criteria and stating the related controls
  in the description; and identifying the risks that threaten the achievement of
  the service organization's service commitments and system requirements based
  on the applicable trust services criteria. Our responsibility is to express an
  opinion on the description and on the suitability of design and operating ef-
  fectiveness of controls stated in the description based on our examination in
  accordance with attestation standards established by the AICPA.
  We are required to be independent and to meet our other ethical responsibilities
  in accordance with relevant ethical requirements relating to the engagement.
  Attestation standards established by the AICPA require that we request cer-
  tain written representations from management, including a representation
  that all relevant matters are reflected in the evaluation of the description of
  its medical claims processing system and the suitability of design and operat-
  ing effectiveness of controls within the system. We requested that management
  provide us with such a representation, but management refused to do so.
  Because of the limitation on the scope of our examination discussed in the pre-
  ceding paragraph, the scope of our work was not sufficient to enable us to ex-
  press, and we do not express, an opinion on whether XYZ's description of its
  medical claims processing system presents the system that was designed and
  implemented throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX,
  in accordance with the description criteria, or on whether the controls stated
  therein were suitably designed and operating effectively throughout the period
  January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to provide reasonable assurance that
  XYZ's service commitments and system requirements were achieved based on
  the applicable trust services criteria, in all material respects.




       3 The 2017 trust services criteria are codified in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria

  for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy (With Revised Points of
  Focus — 2022). As points of focus may be updated without changes to criteria, service organization
  management and the service auditor should review the most current version of TSP section 100 for
  the most up-to-date guidance.


AAG-SOP APP C-3                                                                   ©2022, AICPA
             Illustrative Management Assertion and Service Auditor’s Report                           273
Appendix D
  Illustrative Management Assertion and
  Service Auditor’s Report for a Type 1
  Examination
  This appendix is nonauthoritative and is included for informational purposes
  only.
  In the following illustrative management assertion and service auditor's report,
  XYZ Service Organization has engaged the service auditor to examine and re-
  port on the description of the service organization's medical claims processing
  system and the suitability of the design of its controls relevant to security, avail-
  ability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy to provide reasonable
  assurance that the service organization's service commitments and system re-
  quirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.
         Illustrative Assertion by Service Organization Management
                       [XYZ Service Organization’s Letterhead]
              Assertion of XYZ Service Organization Management
  We have prepared the accompanying description of XYZ Service Organization's
  (XYZ's) medical claims processing system titled "XYZ Service Organization's
  Description of Its Medical Claims Processing System" as of December 31, 20XX,
  (description) based on the criteria for a description of a service organization's
  system in DC section 200, 2018 Description Criteria for a Description of a Ser-
  vice Organization's System in a SOC 2® Report, in AICPA Description Criteria,
  (description criteria).1 The description is intended to provide report users with
  information about the medical claims processing system that may be useful
  when assessing the risks arising from interactions with XYZ's system, particu-
  larly information about system controls that XYZ has designed, implemented,
  and operated to provide reasonable assurance that its service commitments
  and system requirements were achieved based on the trust services criteria
  relevant to security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and pri-
  vacy (applicable trust services criteria) set forth in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust
  Services Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality,
  and Privacy, in AICPA Trust Services Criteria.2
  We confirm, to the best of our knowledge and belief, that
            a. the description presents XYZ's medical claims processing system
               that was designed and implemented as of December 31, 20XX, in
               accordance with the description criteria.


       1 The 2018 description criteria are codified as DC section 200, 2018 Description Criteria for

  a Description of a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2® Report (With Revised Implementation
  Guidance — 2022), in AICPA Description Criteria. As implementation guidance may be updated with-
  out changes to criteria, service organization management and the service auditor should review the
  most current version of DC section 200 for the most up-to-date guidance.
       2 The 2017 trust services criteria are codified in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria

  for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy (With Revised Points of
  Focus — 2022), in AICPA Trust Services Criteria. As points of focus may be updated without changes
  to criteria, service organization management and the service auditor should review the most current
  version of TSP section 100 for the most up-to-date guidance.


  ©2022, AICPA                                                                       AAG-SOP APP D
274   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

            b. the controls stated in the description were suitably designed as of
               December 31, 20XX, to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's
               service commitments and system requirements would be achieved
               based on the applicable trust services criteria if its controls oper-
               ated effectively as of that date.
           Illustrative Independent Service Auditor's Type 1 Report
      Independent Service Auditor's Report on a SOC 2 Examination3
  To: Management of XYZ Service Organization
  Scope
  We have examined XYZ Service Organization's (XYZ's) accompanying descrip-
  tion of its medical claims processing system titled "XYZ Service Organiza-
  tion's Description of Its Medical Claims Processing System" as of December 31,
  20XX,4 (description) based on the criteria for a description of a service organi-
  zation's system in DC section 200, 2018 Description Criteria for a Description of
  a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2® Report, in AICPA Description Cri-
  teria, (description criteria) and the suitability of the design of controls stated
  in the description as of December 31, 20XX, to provide reasonable assurance
  that XYZ's service commitments and system requirements would be achieved
  based on the trust services criteria relevant to security, availability, process-
  ing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy (applicable trust services criteria) set
  forth in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availabil-
  ity, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy, in AICPA Trust Services
  Criteria.5
  Service Organization's Responsibilities
  XYZ is responsible for its service commitments and system requirements and
  for designing, implementing, and operating effective controls within the system
  to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
  requirements would be achieved. XYZ has provided the accompanying asser-
  tion titled "Assertion of XYZ Service Organization Management" (assertion)
  about the description and the suitability of the design of controls stated therein.
  XYZ is also responsible for preparing the description and assertion, including
  the completeness, accuracy, and method of presentation of the description and
  assertion; providing the services covered by the description; selecting the appli-
  cable trust services criteria and stating the related controls in the description;
  and identifying the risks that threaten the achievement of the service organi-
  zation's service commitments and system requirements.


      3   The report may also be titled "Report of Independent Service Auditors."
      4   The title of the description of the service organization's system in the service auditor's report
  should be the same as the title used by service organization management in its description of the
  service organization's system.
       5 A statement such as the following is added to the service auditor's report when information

  that is not covered by the report is included in the description of the service organization's system:
             The information included in section X, "Other Information Provided by XYZ Service Or-
             ganization That Is Not Covered by the Service Auditor's Report," is presented by XYZ
             management to provide additional information and is not a part of XYZ's description. In-
             formation about XYZ's [describe the nature of the information, for example, planned sys-
             tem changes] has not been subjected to the procedures applied in the examination of the
             description and of the suitability of the design of controls to achieve XYZ's service com-
             mitments and system requirements based on the applicable trust services criteria, and
             accordingly, we express no opinion on it.


AAG-SOP APP D                                                                        ©2022, AICPA
         Illustrative Management Assertion and Service Auditor’s Report        275
Service Auditor's Responsibilities
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the description and on the suit-
ability of design of controls stated in the description based on our examination.
Our examination was conducted in accordance with attestation standards es-
tablished by the AICPA. Those standards require that we plan and perform our
examination to obtain reasonable assurance about whether, in all material re-
spects, the description is presented in accordance with the description criteria
and the controls stated therein were suitably designed to provide reasonable
assurance that the service organization's service commitments and system re-
quirements would be achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.
We believe that the evidence we obtained is sufficient and appropriate to pro-
vide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
We are required to be independent and to meet our other ethical responsibilities
in accordance with relevant ethical requirements relating to the engagement.
An examination of the description of a service organization's system and the
suitability of the design of controls involves the following:

        • Obtaining   an understanding of the system and the service orga-
          nization's service commitments and system requirements
        • Assessing   the risks that the description is not presented in ac-
          cordance with the description criteria and that controls were not
             suitably designed
        •    Performing procedures to obtain evidence about whether the de-
             scription is presented in accordance with the description criteria
        •    Performing procedures to obtain evidence about whether controls
             stated in the description were suitably designed to provide rea-
             sonable assurance that the service organization would achieve its
             service commitments and system requirements based the appli-
             cable trust services criteria
        •    Evaluating the overall presentation of the description

Our examination also included performing such other procedures as we consid-
ered necessary in the circumstances.
Inherent Limitations
The description is prepared to meet the common needs of a broad range of report
users and may not, therefore, include every aspect of the system that individual
report users may consider important to meet their informational needs.
There are inherent limitations in any system of internal control, including the
possibility of human error and the circumvention of controls. The projection to
the future of any conclusions about the suitability of the design of controls is
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in
conditions or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may
deteriorate.
Other Matter
We did not perform any procedures regarding the operating effectiveness of
controls stated in the description and, accordingly, do not express an opinion
thereon.

©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP APP D
276   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  Opinion
  In our opinion, in all material respects,
          a. the description presents XYZ's medical claims processing system
              that was designed and implemented as of December 31, 20XX, in
              accordance with the description criteria.
          b. the controls stated in the description were suitably designed as of
              December 31, 20XX, to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's
              service commitments and system requirements would be achieved
              based on the applicable trust services criteria, if its controls oper-
              ated effectively as of that date.
  Restricted Use
  This report is intended solely for the information and use of XYZ, user enti-
  ties of XYZ's medical claims processing system as of December 31, 20XX, busi-
  ness partners of XYZ subject to risks arising from interactions with the medical
  claims processing system, practitioners providing services to such user entities
  and business partners, prospective user entities and business partners, and
  regulators who have sufficient knowledge and understanding of the following:
            • The nature of the service provided by the service organization
            • How   the service organization's system interacts with user entities,
              business partners, subservice organizations, and other parties
            • Internal control and its limitations
            • User   entity responsibilities and how they may affect the user en-
              tity's ability to effectively use the service organization's services
            • The applicable trust services criteria
            • The   risks that may threaten the achievement of the service or-
              ganization's service commitments and system requirements and
                how controls address those risks
  This report is not intended to be, and should not be, used by anyone other than
  these specified parties.
  [Service auditor's signature]
  [City and state where the report is issued]
  [Date of the service auditor's report]




AAG-SOP APP D                                                     ©2022, AICPA
               Illustrative Service Auditor’s Report for a SOC 2+ Examination                             277
Appendix E
  Illustrative Service Auditor’s Report for a
  SOC 2+ Examination
  This appendix is nonauthoritative and is included for informational purposes
  only.
  In the following illustrative service auditor's report, XYZ Service Organization
  has engaged the service auditor to examine and report on (a) the description
  of the service organization's infrastructure services system; (b) the suitability of
  the design of its controls relevant to security, availability, processing integrity,
  confidentiality, a nd p rivacy t o p rovide r easonable a ssurance t hat t he s ervice or-
  ganization's service commitments and system requirements were achieved based
  on the applicable trust services criteria; (c) the operating effectiveness of its con-
  trols relevant to security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and
  privacy to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service
  commitments and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable
  trust services criteria, and (d) the service organization's implementation of con-
  trols to meet the requirements of ABC Framework.
      Independent Service Auditor's Report on a SOC 2+ Engagement
  To: Management of XYZ Service Organization
  Scope
  We have examined XYZ Service Organization's (XYZ's) accompanying descrip-
  tion of its infrastructure services system titled "XYZ Service Organization's
  Description of Its Infrastructure Services System" throughout the period Jan-
  uary 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX (description) based on the criteria for a
  description of a service organization's system in DC section 200, 2018 Descrip-
  tion Criteria for a Description of a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2®
  Report, in AICPA , Description Criteria, (description criteria) and the suitability
  of the design and operating effectiveness of controls stated in the description
  throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to provide
  reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
  requirements were achieved based on the trust services criteria relevant to
  security and availability (appliable trust services criteria) set forth in TSP
  section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing
  Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy, in AICPA Trust Services Criteria.
  We have also examined whether the controls stated in the description were
  implemented to meet the requirements set forth in Sections XX through YY of
  ABC Framework.1,2
  Service Organization's Responsibilities
  XYZ is responsible for its service commitments and system requirements and
  for designing, implementing, and operating effective controls within the system


      1 The service auditor should be as specific as possible when referring to the location of the criteria

  within the framework document.
      2 If management has not included in the description how the controls met the requirements

  of ABC Framework, references to "stated in the description" would be omitted when describing the
  implemented controls.


  ©2022, AICPA                                                                          AAG-SOP APP E
278   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
  requirements were achieved. XYZ has provided the accompanying assertion ti-
  tled "Assertion of XYZ Service Organization Management" (assertion) about
  the description and the suitability of design and operating effectiveness of con-
  trols stated therein. XYZ is also responsible for preparing the description and
  assertion, including the completeness, accuracy, and method of presentation of
  the description and assertion; providing the services covered by the description;
  selecting the applicable trust services criteria and stating the related controls
  in the description; and identifying the risks that threaten the achievement of
  the service organization's service commitments and system requirements.
  XYZ is also responsible for selecting ABC Framework as additional criteria
  and implementing controls to meet the requirements set forth in Sections X.X
  through Y.Y of ABC Framework.
  Service Auditor's Responsibilities
  Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the description and on the suit-
  ability of design and operating effectiveness of controls as stated in the de-
  scription based on our examination. Our examination was conducted in accor-
  dance with attestation standards established by the AICPA. Those standards
  require that we plan and perform our examination to obtain reasonable assur-
  ance about whether, in all material respects, the description is presented in
  accordance with the description criteria and the controls stated therein were
  suitably designed and operated effectively to provide reasonable assurance that
  the service organization's service commitments and system requirements were
  achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria
  We are also responsible for expressing an opinion about whether the controls
  stated in the description were implemented to meet the requirements set forth
  in ABC Framework based on our examination. Attestations standards estab-
  lished by the AICPA require that we also plan and perform our examination to
  obtain reasonable assurance about whether, in all material respects, XYZ im-
  plemented controls to meet the requirements set forth in Sections X.X through
  Y.Y of ABC Framework.
  We believe that the evidence we obtained is sufficient and appropriate to pro-
  vide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
  We are required to be independent and to meet our other ethical responsibilities
  in accordance with relevant ethical requirements relating to the engagement.
  An examination of the description of a service organization's system, the suit-
  ability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls, and the implemen-
  tation of controls to meet the requirements of ABC Framework involves the
  following:

          • Obtaining   an understanding of the system and the service orga-
            nization's service commitments and system requirements and the
               requirements of ABC Framework
          •    Assessing the risks that the description is not presented in ac-
               cordance with the description criteria and that controls were not
               suitably designed or did not operate effectively
          •    Performing procedures to obtain evidence about whether the de-
               scription is presented in accordance with the description criteria
          •    Performing procedures to obtain evidence about whether con-
               trols stated in the description were suitably designed to provide

AAG-SOP APP E                                                    ©2022, AICPA
           Illustrative Service Auditor’s Report for a SOC 2+ Examination       279
              reasonable assurance that the service organization achieved its
              service commitments and system requirements based on the ap-
              plicable trust services criteria
          •   Testing the operating effectiveness of controls stated in the de-
              scription to provide reasonable assurance that the service orga-
              nization achieved its service commitments and system require-
              ments based on the applicable trust services criteria
          •   Performing procedures to obtain evidence about whether the con-
              trols stated in the description were implemented to meet the re-
              quirements set forth in ABC Framework
          •   Evaluating the overall presentation of the description
Our examination also included performing such other procedures as we consid-
ered necessary in the circumstances.
Inherent Limitations
The description is prepared to meet the common needs of a broad range of report
users and may not, therefore, include every aspect of the system that individual
users may consider important to meet their informational needs.
There are inherent limitations in the effectiveness of any system of inter-
nal control, including the possibility of human error and the circumvention of
controls.
Because of their nature, controls may not always operate effectively to provide
reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commitments and
system requirements are achieved based on the applicable trust services crite-
ria. Also, the projection to the future of any conclusions about the suitability
of the design and operating effectiveness of controls is subject to the risk that
controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions or that the
degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Description of Tests of Controls
The specific controls we tested and the nature, timing, and results of those tests
are listed in section XX.
Opinion
In our opinion, in all material respects,
        a. the description presents XYZ's infrastructure services system that
           was designed and implemented throughout the period January 1,
           20XX, to December 31, 20XX, in accordance with the description
           criteria;
          b. the controls stated in the description were suitably designed
             throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to
             provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and
             system requirements would be achieved based on the applicable
             trust services criteria if its controls operated effectively through-
             out that period;
          c. the controls stated in the description operated effectively through-
             out the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to provide
             reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
             requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services
             criteria; and


©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP APP E
280   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          d. the controls stated in the description were implemented to meet
              the requirements set forth on pages XX through YY of ABC
              framework.3
  Restricted Use
  This report, including the description of tests of controls and results thereof in
  section XX, is intended solely for the information and use of XYZ, user entities
  of XYZ's infrastructure services system during some or all of the period Jan-
  uary 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, business partners of XYZ subject to risks
  arising from interactions with the infrastructure services system, practitioners
  providing services to such user entities and business partners, prospective user
  entities and business partners, regulators, or sponsoring organizations who de-
  veloped ABC Framework, all of whom have sufficient knowledge and under-
  standing of the following:4
             • The nature of the service provided by the service organization
             • How   the service organization's system interacts with user entities,
               business partners, subservice organizations, and other parties
             • Internal control and its limitations
             • User   entity responsibilities and how they may affect the user en-
               tity's ability to effectively use the service organization's services
             • The applicable trust services criteria
             • The requirements of ABC Framework
             • The   risks that may threaten the achievement of the service or-
               ganization's service commitments and system requirements and
                  how controls address those risks
  This report is not intended to be, and should not be, used by anyone other than
  these specified parties.
  [Service auditor's signature]
  [City and state where the report is issued]
  [Date of the service auditor's report]




       3 The wording of the service auditor's opinion may vary depending on the objective of the frame-

  work and the related criteria. For example, if the objective of the framework is to obtain information
  about the implementation and operating effectiveness of the controls to achieve objectives set forth
  in the framework, the opinion would also address the operating effectiveness of controls.
       4 This paragraph assumes that management and the service auditor believe all the intended

  users listed have sufficient knowledge of the requirements of ABC Framework to use the SOC 2+
  report. In other situations, however, not all the intended users listed have that knowledge and the
  service auditor may need to modify this paragraph accordingly.


AAG-SOP APP E                                                                     ©2022, AICPA
             Illustrative Management Assertion and Service Auditor’s Report                           281
Appendix F
  Illustrative Management Assertion
  and Service Auditor’s Report for
  a SOC 3 Examination
  This appendix is nonauthoritative and is included for informational purposes
  only.
  In the following illustrative management assertion and service auditor's report,
  XYZ Service Organization has engaged the service auditor to (a) examine the
  controls within the system relevant to security, availability, confidentiality, and
  privacy and (b) issue a SOC 3 report that can be posted on its website to encour-
  age prospective customers to contract the service organization's services.
         Illustrative Assertion by Service Organization Management
                       [XYZ Service Organization’s Letterhead]
              Assertion of XYZ Service Organization Management
  We are responsible for designing, implementing, operating, and maintaining ef-
  fective controls within XYZ Service Organization's (XYZ's) transportation man-
  agement system (system) throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December
  31, 20XX, to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and
  system requirements were achieved based on the trust services criteria rele-
  vant to security, availability, confidentiality, and privacy (applicable trust ser-
  vices criteria) set forth in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Se-
  curity, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy, in AICPA
  Trust Services Criteria.1 Our description of the boundaries of the system is pre-
  sented in attachment A and identifies the aspects of the system covered by our
  assertion.
  We have performed an evaluation of the effectiveness of the controls within
  the system throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to
  provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system re-
  quirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria. XYZ's
  objectives for the system in applying the applicable trust services criteria are
  embodied in its service commitments and system requirements relevant to the
  applicable trust services criteria. The principal service commitments and sys-
  tem requirements related to the applicable trust services criteria are presented
  in attachment B.
  There are inherent limitations in any system of internal control, including the
  possibility of human error and the circumvention of controls. Because of these
  inherent limitations, a service organization may achieve reasonable, but not
  absolute, assurance that its service commitments and system requirements are
  achieved.


       1 The 2017 trust services criteria are codified in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria

  for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy (With Revised Points of
  Focus — 2022), in AICPA Trust Services Criteria. As points of focus may be updated without changes
  to criteria, service organization management and the service auditor should review the most current
  version of TSP section 100 for the most up-to-date guidance.


  ©2022, AICPA                                                                       AAG-SOP APP F
282   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  We assert that the controls within the system were effective throughout the
  period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to provide reasonable assurance
  that XYZ's service commitments and system requirements were achieved based
  on the applicable trust services criteria.
  Attachment A
  An illustrative description of the boundaries of the system can be found on the
  AICPA website.
  Attachment B
  An illustrative description of a service organization's principal service commit-
  ments and system requirements can be found on the AICPA website.
           Illustrative Independent Service Auditor's SOC 3 Report
      Independent Service Auditor's Report on a SOC 3 Examination2
  To: Management of XYZ Service Organization
  Scope
  We have examined XYZ Service Organization's (XYZ's) accompanying asser-
  tion titled "Assertion of XYZ Service Organization Management" (assertion)
  that the controls within XYZ's transportation management system (system)
  were effective throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX,
  to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
  requirements were achieved based on the trust services criteria relevant to
  security, availability, confidentiality, and privacy (applicable trust services cri-
  teria) set forth in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security,
  Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy, in AICPA Trust
  Services Criteria.
  Service Organization's Responsibilities
  XYZ is responsible for its service commitments and system requirements and
  for designing, implementing, and operating effective controls within the system
  to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
  requirements were achieved. XYZ has also provided the accompanying asser-
  tion about the effectiveness of controls within the system. When preparing its
  assertion, XYZ is responsible for selecting, and identifying in its assertion, the
  applicable trust services criteria and for having a reasonable basis for its as-
  sertion by performing an assessment of the effectiveness of the controls within
  the system.
  Service Auditor's Responsibilities
  Our responsibility is to express an opinion, based on our examination, on man-
  agement's assertion that controls within the system were effective throughout
  the period to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's ser-
  vice commitments and system requirements were achieved based on the appli-
  cable trust services criteria. Our examination was conducted in accordance with
  attestation standards established by the AICPA. Those standards require that
  we plan and perform our examination to obtain reasonable assurance about
  whether management's assertion is fairly stated, in all material respects. We
  believe that the evidence we obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide
  a reasonable basis for our opinion.


      2   The report may also be titled "Report of Independent Service Auditors."


AAG-SOP APP F                                                                       ©2022, AICPA
          Illustrative Management Assertion and Service Auditor’s Report        283
We are required to be independent and to meet our other ethical responsibilities
in accordance with relevant ethical requirements relating to the engagement.
Our examination included:
          • Obtaining   an understanding of the system and the service orga-
            nization's service commitments and system requirements
          • Assessing   the risks that controls were not effective to achieve
            XYZ's service commitments and system requirements based on
              the applicable trust services criteria
          •   Performing procedures to obtain evidence about whether controls
              within the system were effective to achieve XYZ's service commit-
              ments and system requirements based on the applicable trust ser-
              vices criteria
Our examination also included performing such other procedures as we consid-
ered necessary in the circumstances.
Inherent Limitations
There are inherent limitations in the effectiveness of any system of inter-
nal control, including the possibility of human error and the circumvention of
controls.
Because of their nature, controls may not always operate effectively to provide
reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commitments and
system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services crite-
ria. Also, the projection to the future of any conclusions about the effectiveness
of controls is subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because
of changes in conditions or that the degree of compliance with the policies or
procedures may deteriorate.
Opinion
In our opinion, management's assertion that the controls within XYZ's trans-
portation management system were effective throughout the period January
1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's
service commitments and system requirements were achieved based on the ap-
plicable trust services criteria is fairly stated, in all material respects.
[Service auditor's signature]
[City and state where the report is issued]
[Date of the service auditor's report]




©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP APP F
                    Performing and Reporting in a SOC 2 Examination                          285
Appendix G
  Performing and Reporting in a SOC 2
  Examination in Accordance With
  International Standards on Assurance
  Engagements (ISAEs) or in Accordance With
  Both the AICPA’s Attestation Standards and
  the ISAEs
  This appendix is nonauthoritative and is included for informational purposes
  only.
  The advent of technology has led to the evolution of businesses that are of-
  ten globally interconnected and interdependent. This has resulted in questions
  related to the use of SOC 2 reports internationally. For example, a service or-
  ganization located in the United States might provide services to a user entity
  located in a foreign country (foreign user entity), or a non-U.S. CPA might be
  asked to perform a SOC 2 examination for a service organization located out-
  side of the United States (foreign service organization). The purpose of this ap-
  pendix is to answer some of the more commonly asked questions on this topic.
  1. Inquiry — A foreign user entity of a U.S. service organization may wish to
  obtain a SOC 2 report from the U.S. service organization. In the United States, a
  SOC 2 examination is performed in accordance with AT-C section 105, Concepts
  Common to All Attestation Engagements,1 and AT-C section 205, Assertion-
  Based Examination Engagements,2 of the attestation standards established by
  the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) and in accor-
  dance with AICPA Guide SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at
  a Service Organization Relevant to Security, Availability, Processing Integrity,
  Confidentiality, or Privacy. However, the foreign user entity may request a ser-
  vice auditor's report indicating that the SOC 2 examination was performed in
  accordance with International Standard on Assurance Engagements (ISAE)
  3000 (Revised), Assurance Engagements Other Than Audits or Reviews of His-
  torical Financial Information, which is issued by the International Audit and
  Assurance Standards Board (IAASB). The ISAEs are the international equiv-
  alent of the AICPA's attestation standards. May a U.S. CPA perform a SOC 2
  examination and report in accordance with ISAE 3000 (Revised), rather than
  in accordance with AT-C section 205 of the attestation standards established
  by the AICPA?
  Reply — No. A U.S. CPA may not perform a SOC 2 examination and report only
  in accordance with ISAE 3000 (Revised). Such reporting is not permitted under
  the "Compliance With Standards Rule" (ET sec. 1.310.001)3 of the AICPA Code
  of Professional Conduct, which states that "a member who performs auditing,


      1 All AT-C sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.
      2 A SOC 2 examination may also be performed in accordance with AT section 101, Attest En-
  gagements, of the PCAOB's interim attestation standards.
       PCAOB interim attestation standards can be found in PCAOB Standards and Related Rules.
      3 All ET sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.



  ©2022, AICPA                                                               AAG-SOP APP G
286   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  review, compilation, management consulting, tax, or other professional services
  shall comply with standards promulgated by bodies designated by Council."
  When a member is engaged to perform a professional service that is covered
  by established standards, the member must perform the service using such
  established standards.
  Council has designated the Auditing Standards Board as the body with re-
  sponsibility for promulgating Statements on Standards for Attestation Engage-
  ments, which govern the performance of SOC 2 examinations. Therefore, a U.S.
  CPA engaged to perform a SOC 2 examination must perform the examination
  in accordance with the attestation standards issued by the AICPA (AT-C section
  205) and report accordingly.
  2. Inquiry — May the U.S. CPA perform a SOC 2 examination in accordance
  with both AT-C section 205 of the attestation standards issued by the AICPA
  and ISAE 3000 (Revised) of the assurance standards issued by the IAASB?
  Reply — Yes. A U.S. CPA may be engaged to perform a SOC 2 examination
  for the foreign user entity of a U.S. service organization (as noted above) or to
  perform a SOC 2 examination for a foreign service organization. A frequently
  asked question titled "Use of standards that have not been established by a
  body designated by AICPA Council,"4 clarifies that a member is permitted to
  apply any relevant alternative standards in an attestation examination. There-
  fore, a U.S. CPA who performs a SOC 2 examination in accordance with AT-C
  section 205 may also perform the examination in accordance with ISAE 3000
  (Revised) and issue one report that states that the examination was performed
  in accordance with the attestation standards established by the AICPA and
  ISAE 3000 (Revised) issued by the IAASB, provided the U.S. CPA complies with
  the requirements of both sets of standards and there are no conflicts between
  AT-C section 205 and IASE 3000 (Revised) that would lead the U.S. CPA to
  reach a different conclusion with respect to the opinion.
  Although many of the requirements of AT-C section 205 and ISAE 3000 (Re-
  vised) are similar, there are certain differences. For example, under the require-
  ments of ISAE 3000 (Revised), a practitioner may issue an examination report
  without obtaining a written assertion from the responsible party; under AT-C
  section 205, a practitioner is not permitted to issue an examination report if
  the practitioner has not obtained such an assertion from the responsible party,
  except when the responsible party is not the engaging party.5 A SOC 2 exami-
  nation performed in accordance with both the attestation standards and ISAEs
  is expected to be similar in scope and approach to a SOC 2 examination per-
  formed in accordance with only the attestation standards.
  To make it easier for CPAs engaged to examine and report under both sets of
  standards, the ASB has published "Substantive Differences Between Interna-
  tional Standard on Assurance Engagements (ISAE) 3000 (Revised), Assurance


       4 Frequently Asked Questions: General ethics questions issued by the AICPA Professional Ethics

  Division as of May 1, 2017. https://us.aicpa.org/content/dam/aicpa/interestareas/professionalethics/
  resources/tools/downloadabledocuments/ethics-general-faqs.pdf
       5 A SOC 2 examination, as described in this guide, is based on service organization management

  providing a written assertion to accompany the service auditor's report. Paragraph .86 of AT-C section
  205, Assertion-Based Examination Engagements, permits a practitioner to report on a subject matter
  when the responsible party is not the engaging party and refuses to provide a written assertion, as
  long as the report discloses management's refusal and restricts use to the engaging party. However,
  this approach is unlikely to be appropriate in most SOC 2 engagements.


AAG-SOP APP G                                                                     ©2022, AICPA
                Performing and Reporting in a SOC 2 Examination                   287
Engagements Other Than Audits or Reviews of Historical Financial Informa-
tion, and AT-C sections 105, Concepts Common to All Attestation Engagements,
and 205, Assertion-Based Examination Engagements, of Statements on
Standards for Attestation Engagements," which identifies the substantive dif-
ferences between the requirements of the attestation standards (AT-C sections
105 and 205) and ISAE 3000 (Revised). The document is available at https://
us.aicpa.org/content/dam/aicpa/interestareas/frc/auditattest/downloadable
documents/attest-clarity/differences-between-isae-3000-at-c-105-and-205.pdf.
When the U.S. CPA has performed a SOC 2 examination in accordance with
the attestation standards and the ISAEs, the U.S. CPA would indicate in the
report that the examination was also conducted in accordance with ISAE 3000
(Revised). In addition, the U.S. CPA's report would need to include the elements
of the auditor's report included in paragraphs .63–.68 of AT-C section 205 and
paragraph .69 of ISAE 3000 (Revised).
The following is an illustrative report that meets the requirements in AT-C
section 205 and ISAE 3000 (Revised) related to the contents of the report, when
the U.S. CPA is reporting under both standards. The illustrative SOC 2 report
is prepared in accordance with AT-C section 205; additions included to meet the
requirements of ISAE 3000 (Revised) are shown in boldface italics.
          Independent Service Auditor's Assurance Report on
                        a SOC 2 Examination
To: Management of XYZ Service Organization
Scope
We have examined XYZ Service Organization's (XYZ's) accompanying descrip-
tion of its medical claims processing system titled "XYZ Service Organization's
Description of Its Medical Claims Processing System" throughout the period
January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, (description) based on the criteria for
a description of a service organization's system in DC section 200, 2018 Descrip-
tion Criteria for a Description of a Service Organization's System in a SOC 2®
Report, in AICPA Description Criteria, (description criteria) and the suitability
of the design and operating effectiveness of controls stated in the description
throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to provide rea-
sonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system requirements
were achieved based on the trust services criteria for security, availability, pro-
cessing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy (applicable trust services criteria)
set forth in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availabil-
ity, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy, in AICPA Trust Services
Criteria.
Service Organization's Responsibilities
XYZ is responsible for its service commitments and system requirements and
for designing, implementing, and operating effective controls within the system
to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
requirements were achieved. XYZ has provided the accompanying assertion ti-
tled "Assertion of XYZ Service Organization Management" (assertion) about
the description and the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness
of controls stated therein. XYZ is also responsible for preparing the descrip-
tion and assertion, including the completeness, accuracy, and method of pre-
sentation of the description and assertion; providing the services covered by
the description; selecting the applicable trust services criteria and stating the
related controls in the description; and identifying the risks that threaten the

©2022, AICPA                                                        AAG-SOP APP G
288   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  achievement of the service organization's service commitments and system re-
  quirements.
  Service Auditor's Responsibilities
  Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the description and on the suit-
  ability of the design and operating effectiveness of the controls stated in the
  description based on our examination. Our examination was conducted in ac-
  cordance with attestation standards established by the American Institute of
  Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) and in accordance with Interna-
  tional Standard on Assurance Engagements 3000 (Revised), Assurance
  Engagements Other Than Audits or Reviews of Historical Financial In-
  formation, issued by the International Auditing and Assurance Stan-
  dards Board. Those standards require that we plan and perform our exami-
  nation to obtain reasonable assurance about whether, in all material respects,
  the description is presented in accordance with the description criteria and the
  controls stated therein were suitably designed and operated effectively to pro-
  vide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commitments
  and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services
  criteria. We believe that the evidence we obtained is sufficient and appropriate
  to provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
  An examination of the description of a service organization's system and the
  suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls involves the
  following:

          • Obtaining an understanding of the system and XYZ's service com-
            mitments and system requirements
          • Assessing the risks that the description is not presented in ac-
            cordance with the description criteria and that controls were not
               suitably designed or did not operate effectively
          •    Performing procedures to obtain evidence about whether the de-
               scription is presented in accordance with the description criteria
          •    Performing procedures to obtain evidence about whether the con-
               trols stated in the description were suitably designed to provide
               reasonable assurance that the service organization achieved its
               service commitments and system requirements based the appli-
               cable trust services criteria
          •    Testing the operating effectiveness of the controls stated in the
               description to provide reasonable assurance that the service or-
               ganization achieved its service commitments and system require-
               ments based on the applicable trust services criteria
          •    Evaluating the overall presentation of the description

  Service Auditor's Independence and Quality Control
  We are required to be independent and to meet our other ethical responsibilities
  in accordance with the Code of Professional Conduct established by the
  AICPA and the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants’
  Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants.
  We applied the Statements on Quality Control Standards established by
  the AICPA and, accordingly, maintain a comprehensive system of qual-
  ity control.

AAG-SOP APP G                                                    ©2022, AICPA
                 Performing and Reporting in a SOC 2 Examination                 289
Inherent Limitations
The description is prepared to meet the common needs of a broad range of report
users and may not, therefore, include every aspect of the system that individual
users may consider important to meet their informational needs.
There are inherent limitations in the effectiveness of any system of inter-
nal control, including the possibility of human error and the circumvention of
controls.
Because of their nature, controls may not always operate effectively to provide
reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commitments and
system requirements are achieved based on the applicable trust services crite-
ria. Also, the projection to the future of any conclusions about the suitability
of the design and operating effectiveness of controls is subject to the risk that
controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions or that the
degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Description of Tests of Controls
The specific controls we tested and the nature, timing, and results of those tests
are listed in section XX.
Opinion
In our opinion, in all material respects,
        a. the description presents XYZ's medical claims processing system
           that was designed and implemented throughout the period January
           1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, in accordance with the description
           criteria;
          b. the controls stated in the description were suitably designed
             throughout the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to
             provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and
             system requirements would be achieved based on the applicable
             trust services criteria, if its controls operated effectively through-
             out that period; and
          c. the controls stated in the description operated effectively through-
             out the period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, to provide
             reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system
             requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services
             criteria.
Restricted Use
This report, including the description of tests of controls and results thereof in
section XX, is intended solely for the information and use of XYZ, user entities
of XYZ's medical claims processing system during some or all of the period Jan-
uary 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, business partners of XYZ subject to risks
arising from interactions with the medical claims processing system, practition-
ers providing services to such user entities and business partners, prospective
user entities and business partners, and regulators who have sufficient knowl-
edge and understanding of the following:

          • The nature of the service provided by the service organization
          • How  the service organization's system interacts with user entities,
            business partners, subservice organizations, and other parties
          • Internal control and its limitations
©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP APP G
290   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

           • User   entity responsibilities and how they may affect the user en-
             tity's ability to effectively use the service organization's services
           • The applicable trust services criteria
           • The   risks that may threaten the achievement of the service or-
             ganization's service commitments and system requirements and
               how controls address those risks
  This report is not intended to be, and should not be, used by anyone other than
  these specified parties.
  [Service auditor's signature]
  [City and state where the report is issued]
  [Date of the service auditor's report]
  3. Inquiry — Given the same fact pattern as in the previous inquiry, may a
  non-U.S. CPA (or equivalent, such as a Chartered Accountant) perform a SOC
  2 examination in accordance with ISAE 3000 (Revised)?
  Reply — Yes. If not precluded by regulations of the local jurisdiction, a non-
  U.S. CPA may perform a SOC 2 examination in accordance with ISAE 3000
  (Revised) and report accordingly. The non-U.S. CPA may find the guidance in
  AICPA Guide SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service
  Organization Relevant to Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confiden-
  tiality, or Privacy helpful when performing such an examination.
  The following is an illustrative service auditor's report that may be appropriate
  when reporting on a SOC 2 examination performed in accordance with ISAE
  3000 (Revised). The illustrative report is based on the reporting requirements
  of ISAE 3000 (Revised). However, it has also been modeled after the reports in
  ISAE 3402, Assurance Reports on Controls at a Service Organization. Although
  the subject matter of the reports in ISAE 3402 is "controls at a service orga-
  nization that provides a service to user entities that is likely to be relevant to
  user entities' internal control as it relates to financial reporting" rather than
  controls at the service organization relevant to security, availability, processing
  integrity, confidentiality, or privacy, which is the subject matter of a SOC 2 ex-
  amination, there are certain aspects of the language in the illustrative report
  in ISAE 3402 that more closely parallel a SOC 2 examination.
           Independent Service Auditor's Assurance Report on a
                          SOC 2 Examination
  To: Management of XYZ Service Organization
  Scope
  We have been engaged to report on XYZ Service Organization's (XYZ's) descrip-
  tion at pages [bb–cc] of its medical claims processing system throughout the
  period January 1, 20XX, to December 31, 20XX, (the description) based on the
  criteria for a description of a service organization's system in DC section 200,
  2018 Description Criteria for a Description of a Service Organization's System
  in a SOC 2® Report, in AICPA Description Criteria, (description criteria) and
  on the design and operation of controls stated in the description to provide rea-
  sonable assurance that XYZ's service commitments and system requirements
  were achieved based on the trust services criteria relevant to security, avail-
  ability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy set forth in TSP section
  100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity,
  Confidentiality, and Privacy, in AICPA Trust Services Criteria, (applicable trust
  services criteria).

AAG-SOP APP G                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                  Performing and Reporting in a SOC 2 Examination                             291
Service Organization's Responsibilities
XYZ is responsible for: preparing the description and accompanying statement
at page [aa], including the completeness, accuracy, and method of presentation
of the description and statement; providing the services covered by the descrip-
tion; selecting the applicable trust services category or categories and stating
the related controls in the description; identifying the risks that would threaten
the achievement of the service organization's service commitments and system
requirements; and designing, implementing, and operating controls that are
suitably designed and operating effectively to provide reasonable assurance
that its service commitments and system requirements were achieved.
Our Independence and Quality Control
We have complied with the independence and other ethical requirements of the
Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants issued by the International Ethics
Standards Board for Accountants, which is founded on fundamental principles
of integrity, objectivity, professional competence and due care, confidentiality,
and professional behavior.
The firm applies International Standard on Quality Control6 and accordingly
maintains a comprehensive system of quality control including documented
policies and procedures regarding compliance with ethical requirements, pro-
fessional standards, and applicable legal and regulatory requirements.
Service Auditor's Responsibilities
Our responsibility is to express an opinion the description and on the design
and operation of controls related to the service commitments and system re-
quirements stated in that description, based on our procedures. We conducted
our engagement in accordance with International Standard on Assurance En-
gagements 3000 (Revised), Assurance Engagements Other Than Audits or Re-
views of Historical Financial Information, issued by the International Audit-
ing and Assurance Standards Board. That standard requires that we plan and
perform our procedures to obtain reasonable assurance about whether, in all
material respects, the description is fairly presented in accordance with the
description criteria and the controls are suitably designed and operating effec-
tively to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service
commitments and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable
trust services criteria.
An assurance engagement to report on the description and the design and op-
erating effectiveness of controls at a service organization involves performing
procedures to obtain evidence about the disclosures in the service organization's
description of its system and the design and operating effectiveness of controls.
The procedures selected depend on the service auditor's judgment, including
the assessment of the risks that the description is not presented in accordance
with the description criteria and that controls are not suitably designed or oper-
ating effectively. Our procedures included testing the operating effectiveness of
those controls that we consider necessary to obtain reasonable assurance that
the service commitments and system requirements stated in the description
were achieved. An assurance engagement of this type also includes evaluating
the overall presentation of the description.


    6 ISQC I, Quality Control for Firms that Perform Audits and Reviews of Financial Statements,

and Other Assurance and Related Services Engagements.


©2022, AICPA                                                                  AAG-SOP APP G
292   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  We believe that the evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to
  provide a basis for our opinion.
  Limitations of Controls at a Service Organization
  The description is prepared to meet the common needs of a broad range of cus-
  tomers and their auditors and may not, therefore, include every aspect of the
  system that each individual customer may consider important in its own envi-
  ronment. Also, because of their nature, service organization controls may not
  always operate effectively to provide reasonable assurance that the service or-
  ganization's service commitments and system requirements are achieved based
  on the applicable trust services criteria. Also, the projection of any evaluation
  of the suitability of design or operating effectiveness of controls to future pe-
  riods is subject to the risk that controls at a service organization may become
  inadequate or fail.
  Opinion
  Our opinion has been formed on the basis of the matters outlined in this report.
  In our opinion, in all material respects,
          a. the description presents the medical claims processing system as
              designed and implemented throughout the period from January 1,
              20XX, to December 31, 20XX, in accordance with the description
              criteria;
          b. the controls stated in the description were suitably designed
              throughout the period from January 1, 20XX, to December 31,
              20XX, to provide reasonable assurance that XYZ's service commit-
              ments and system requirements would be achieved based on the
              applicable trust services criteria, if its controls operated effectively
              throughout that period; and
          c. the controls, which were those necessary to provide reasonable as-
              surance that XYZ's service commitments and system requirements
              were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria, op-
              erated effectively throughout the period from January 1, 20XX, to
              December 31, 20XX.
  Description of Tests of Controls
  The specific controls tested and the nature, timing and results of those tests
  are listed on pages [yy–zz].
  Intended Users and Purpose
  This report and the description of tests of controls on pages [yy–zz] are intended
  only for customers who have used XYZ's medical claims processing system and
  their auditors, who have a sufficient understanding to consider it, along with
  other information including information about controls operated by customers
  themselves, when assessing the risks arising from interactions with the medi-
  cal claims processing system of XYZ Service Organization.
  [Service auditor's signature]
  [Date of the service auditor's assurance report]
  [Service auditor's address]




AAG-SOP APP G                                                       ©2022, AICPA
                                     Definitions                                 293
Appendix H
  Deﬁnitions
  This appendix is nonauthoritative and is included for informational purposes
  only.
  For purposes of this guide, the following terms have the meanings attributed
  as follows:
  applicable trust services criteria. The criteria codified in TSP section 100,
     2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity,
     Confidentiality, and Privacy (With Revised Points of Focus — 2022), in
     AICPA Trust Services Criteria, used to evaluate controls relevant to the
     trust services category or categories included within the scope of a partic-
     ular examination.
  architecture. The design of the structure of a system, including logical compo-
     nents, and the logical interrelationships of computers, systems, networks,
     or other elements, whether internally or externally hosted.
  authentication. The process of verifying the identity or other attributes
     claimed by or assumed of an entity (user, process, or device) or to verify
     the source and integrity of data.
  authorization. The process of granting access privileges to a user, program,
     or process by a person who has the authority to grant such access.
  board or board of directors. Individuals with responsibility for overseeing
     the strategic direction of the service organization and the obligations re-
     lated to the accountability of the service organization. Depending on the
     nature of the service organization, such responsibilities may be held by a
     board of directors or supervisory board for a corporation, a board of trustees
     for a not-for-profit service organization, a board of governors or commis-
     sioners for a government service organization, general partners for a part-
     nership, or an owner for a small business.
  boundaries of the system (or system boundaries). The boundaries of a sys-
     tem are the specific aspects of a service organization's infrastructure, soft-
     ware, people, procedures, and data necessary to provide its services. When
     systems for multiple services share aspects, infrastructure, software, peo-
     ple, procedures, and data, the systems will overlap, but the boundaries of
     each system will differ. In a SOC 2 engagement that addresses the confi-
     dentiality and privacy criteria, the system boundaries cover, at a minimum,
     all the system components as they relate to the life cycle of the confiden-
     tial and personal information within well-defined processes and informal
     ad hoc procedures.
  business partner. An individual or business (and its employees), other than
     a vendor, that has some degree of involvement with the service organiza-
     tion's business dealings or agrees to cooperate, to any degree, with the ser-
     vice organization (for example, a computer manufacturer that works with
     another company that supplies it with parts).
  carve-out method. Method of addressing the services provided by a subser-
      vice organization in which the components of the subservice organization's
      system used to provide the services to the service organization are excluded

  ©2022, AICPA                                                      AAG-SOP APP H
294   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

      from the description of the service organization's system and from the scope
      of the examination. However, the description identifies (a) the nature of the
      services performed by the subservice organization; (b) the types of controls
      expected to be performed at the subservice organization that are neces-
      sary, in combination with controls at the service organization, to provide
      reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commitments
      and system requirements were achieved; and (c) the controls at the service
      organization used to monitor the effectiveness of the subservice organiza-
      tion's controls.
  collection. The process of obtaining personal information from the individ-
      ual directly (for example, through the individual's submission of an inter-
      net form or a registration form) or from another party such as a business
      partner.
  complementary subservice organization controls (CSOCs). Controls
     that service organization management assumed, in the design of the ser-
     vice organization's system, would be implemented by the subservice orga-
     nization and that are necessary, in combination with controls at the service
     organization, to provide reasonable assurance that the service organiza-
     tion's service commitments and system requirements are achieved.
  complementary user entity controls (CUECs). Controls that service orga-
     nization management assumed, in the design of the service organization's
     system, would be implemented by user entities and that are necessary, in
     combination with controls at the service organization, to provide reason-
     able assurance that the service organization's service commitments and
     system requirements would be achieved.
  component (of internal control). One of five elements of internal control,
     including the control environment, risk assessment, control activities, in-
     formation and communication, and monitoring activities.
  compromise. Refers to a loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability of in-
     formation, including any resulting impairment of (a) processing integrity
     or availability of systems or (b) the integrity or availability of system inputs
     or outputs.
  consent. This privacy requirement is one of the fair information practice ob-
     jectives. Individuals must be able to prevent the collection of their personal
     data, unless legally required. If an individual has a choice about the use or
     disclosure of personal information, consent is the individual's way of giving
     permission for the use or disclosure. Consent may be explicit (for example,
     opting in) or implied (for example, not opting out). There are two types of
     consent:
           • explicit consent. A requirement that an individual "signifies"
             agreement with a data controller by some active communication
               between the parties.

           • implied  consent. When consent may reasonably be inferred from
             the action or inaction of the individual.
  contractor. An individual, other than an employee, engaged to provide services
     to an entity in accordance with the terms of a contract.
  control activity. An action established through policies and procedures that
     helps ensure that management's directives to mitigate risks to the achieve-
     ment of objectives are carried out.

AAG-SOP APP H                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                                  Definitions                                 295
controls at a service organization. The policies and procedures at a service
   organization that are part of the service organization's system of inter-
   nal control. Controls exist within each of the five COSO internal control
   components: control environment, risk assessment, control activities, in-
   formation and communication, and monitoring. The objective of a service
   organization's system of internal control is to provide reasonable assurance
   that its service commitments and system requirements are achieved.
controls at a subservice organization. The policies and procedures at a sub-
   service organization that are relevant to the service organization's achieve-
   ment of its service commitments and system requirements.
COSO. The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Com-
   mission. COSO is a joint initiative of five private sector organizations and
   is dedicated to providing thought leadership through the development of
   frameworks and guidance on enterprise risk management, internal con-
   trol, and fraud deterrence. (See www.coso.org.)
criteria. The benchmarks used to measure or evaluate subject matter.
data controller. An organization that (alone or jointly with others) determines
   the purposes for and the means by which personal data is processed.
data processor. An organization that processes personal data at the direc-
   tion of a data controller. In many cases, a service organization may process
   personal data for its business-to-business (B2B) customers (user entities),
   which in turn may function as data controllers. In other cases, a service
   organization may function as a data controller depending on the facts and
   circumstances.
data subjects. The individuals about whom personal information is collected.
deficiency. Term used to identify misstatements resulting from controls that
    were not suitably designed or did not operate effectively.
description misstatement. Term used to describe differences between (or
   omissions in) the description and the description criteria.
design. As used in the COSO definition of internal control, the internal control
    system design is intended to provide reasonable assurance of the achieve-
    ment of an entity's objectives.
deviation. Term used to identify misstatements resulting from the failure of
   a control to operate in a specific instance. A deviation may, individually or
   in combination with other deviations, result in a deficiency.
disclosure (of information). The provision of access to or the release, trans-
    fer, or divulging in any other manner of information outside the entity
    holding the information. Disclosure is often used interchangeably with the
    terms sharing and onward transfer.
disposal. A phase of the data life cycle that pertains to how an entity removes
    or destroys data or information.
entity. A legal entity or management operating model of any size established
    for a particular purpose. A legal entity may, for example, be a business en-
    terprise, a not-for-profit organization, a government body, or an academic
    institution. The management operating model may follow product or ser-
    vice lines, divisions, or operating units, with geographic markets providing
    for further subdivisions or aggregations of performance.

©2022, AICPA                                                     AAG-SOP APP H
296   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  entity-wide. Activities that apply across the entity — most commonly in rela-
      tion to entity-wide controls.
  environmental protections and safeguards. Controls and other activities
     implemented by the entity to detect, prevent, and manage the risk of casu-
     alty damage to the physical elements of the information system (for exam-
     ple, protections from fire, flood, wind, earthquake, power surge, or power
     outage).
  external users. Users, other than entity personnel, who are authorized by en-
      tity management, customers, or other authorized persons to interact with
      the entity's information system.
  fraud. An intentional act involving the use of deception that results in a mis-
      statement in the subject matter or the assertion.
  inclusive method. Method of addressing the services provided by a subservice
      organization in which the description of the service organization's system
      includes a description of (a) the nature of the services provided by the sub-
      service organization; (b) the components of the subservice organization's
      system used to provide services to the service organization, including the
      subservice organization's controls that are necessary, in combination with
      controls at the service organization, to provide reasonable assurance that
      the service organization's service commitments and system requirements
      were achieved; and (c) the controls at the service organization used to moni-
      tor the effectiveness of the subservice organization's controls. (When using
      the inclusive method, controls at the subservice organization are subject
      to the service auditor's examination procedures. Because the subservice
      organization's system components are included in the description, those
      components are included in the scope of the examination.)
  information and systems. Refers to information in electronic form (electronic
      information) during its use, processing, transmission, and storage and sys-
      tems that use, process, transmit or transfer, and store information.
  information assets. Data and the associated software and infrastructure used
      to process, transmit, and store information.
  information life cycle. The collection, use, retention, disclosure, disposal, or
      anonymization of confidential or personal information within well-defined
      processes and informal ad hoc procedures.
  inherent limitations. Those limitations of all internal control systems. The
     limitations relate to the preconditions of internal control, external events
     beyond the entity's control, limits of human judgment, the reality that
     breakdowns can occur, and the possibility of management override and
     collusion.
  intended users. Individuals or entities that the service organization intends
      will be report users.
  internal control. A process, effected by a service organization's board of di-
      rectors, management, and other personnel, designed to provide reasonable
      assurance regarding the achievement of objectives relating to operations,
      reporting, and compliance.
  management's assertion. A written assertion by management of a service or-
     ganization or management of a subservice organization, if applicable, about


AAG-SOP APP H                                                     ©2022, AICPA
                                    Definitions                                     297
    whether (a) the description of the system is in accordance with the descrip-
    tion criteria, (b) the controls are suitably designed, and (c) in a type 2 report,
    the controls operated effectively to achieve the service organization's ser-
    vice commitments and system requirements based on the applicable trust
    services criteria.
management override. Management's overruling of prescribed policies or
   procedures for illegitimate purposes with the intent of personal gain or
   an enhanced presentation of an entity's financial condition or compliance
   status.
operating effectiveness (or controls that are operating effectively).
   Controls that operated effectively provide reasonable assurance of achiev-
   ing the service organization's service commitments and system require-
   ments based on the applicable trust services criteria.
personal information. Information that is about, or can be related to, an iden-
   tifiable individual.
policies. Management or board member statements of what should be done
    to effect control. Such statements may be documented, explicitly stated in
    communications, or implied through actions and decisions. Policies serve
    as the basis for procedures.
privacy notice. A written communication by entities that collect personal in-
    formation to the individuals about whom personal information is collected
    that explains the entity's (a) policies regarding the nature of the informa-
    tion that they will collect and how that information will be used, retained,
    disclosed, and disposed of or anonymized and (b) commitment to adhere to
    those policies. A privacy notice also includes information about such mat-
    ters as the purpose of collecting the information, the choices that individu-
    als have related to their personal information, the security of such informa-
    tion, and how individuals can contact the entity with inquiries, complaints,
    and disputes related to their personal information. When a user entity col-
    lects personal information from individuals, it typically provides a privacy
    notice to those individuals.
principal service commitments. Disclosures included in the description of
    the service organization's system related to the service commitments made
    by management to its customers about the system used to provide the ser-
    vice. The principal service commitments are those that are likely to be use-
    ful to the broad range of SOC 2 report users.
process or control framework. A framework that contains a set of processes
   or controls, established by another party, that organizations are expected to
   implement in support of establishing an effective system of internal con-
   trol. These frameworks are usually developed by an industry group, reg-
   ulator, governmental entity, standard-setting body, or other organization
   (collectively referred to as sponsoring organizations) to obtain information
   from organizations with which they do business about their processes or
   controls. The most common types of process or control frameworks relate
   to security and privacy.
report users (specified users or specified parties) of a SOC 2 report.
   In this document, the term refers to users of a SOC 2 report. The service
   auditor's report included in a SOC 2 report ordinarily includes an alert


©2022, AICPA                                                         AAG-SOP APP H
298   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

      restricting the use of the report to specified parties who possess sufficient
      knowledge and understanding of the service organization and the system
      to understand the report. The expected knowledge is likely to include an
      understanding of the following matters:

          • The nature of the service provided by the service organization
          • How    the service organization's system interacts with user en-
            tities, business partners, subservice organizations, and other
               parties

          • Internal control and its limitations
          • Complementary    user entity controls and complementary subser-
            vice organization controls and how those controls interact with
               the controls at the service organization to achieve the service or-
               ganization's service commitments and system requirements

          • User   entity responsibilities and how they may affect the user en-
            tity's ability to effectively use the service organization's services

          • The applicable trust services criteria
          • The   risks that may threaten the achievement of the service or-
            ganization's service commitments and system requirements and
               how controls address those risks

      Users likely to possess such knowledge include user entities and their per-
      sonnel, business partners and their personnel, practitioners providing ser-
      vices to such user entities and business partners, prospective user entities
      and business partners, and regulators who understand how the service or-
      ganization's system may be used to provide the services. In some situations,
      federal or state governmental agencies, industry consortiums, or groups
      of subject matter experts (collectively referred to as sponsoring organiza-
      tions) who need information about a specific subject matter (for example,
      security controls over sensitive information) from members of the sponsor-
      ing organization or other entities with whom the sponsoring organization
      does business may also be intended users.
  responsibilities of external users. Those activities and tasks that service
      organization management expects user entities, their employees, and any
      other third-party users of the system to perform for the services provided
      by the service organization to function as intended to meet the needs of
      user entities.
  retention. A phase of the data life cycle that pertains to how long an entity
      stores information for future use or reference.
  risk. The possibility that an event will occur and adversely affect the achieve-
      ment of objectives.
  risk of material misstatement. The risk that the description of the service
      organization's system that was implemented and operated is not presented
      in accordance with the description criteria or that controls were not suit-
      ably designed or operating effectively to provide reasonable assurance that
      the service organization's service commitments and system requirements
      would be achieved.


AAG-SOP APP H                                                    ©2022, AICPA
                                   Definitions                                   299
security event. An occurrence, arising from actual or attempted unauthorized
    access or use by internal or external parties, that impairs or could impair
    the availability, integrity, or confidentiality of information or systems, re-
    sult in unauthorized disclosure or theft of information or other assets, or
    cause damage to systems.
security incident. A security event that requires actions on the part of an
    entity in order to protect information assets and resources.
senior management. The chief executive officer or equivalent organizational
    leader and senior management team.
service auditor. As used in this guide, a CPA who performs a SOC 2 examina-
    tion of controls within a service organization's system relevant to security,
    availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, or privacy.
service commitments. Declarations made by service organization manage-
    ment to user entities and others (such as user entities' customers) about
    the system used to provide the service. Service commitments can be com-
    municated in written individualized agreements, standardized contracts,
    service-level agreements, or published statements (for example, in a secu-
    rity practices statement).
service organization. An organization, or segment of an organization, that
    provides services to user entities.
service provider. A vendor (such as a service organization) engaged to pro-
    vide services to the entity. Service providers include outsourced services
    providers as well as vendors that provide services not associated with busi-
    ness functions, such as janitorial, legal, and audit services.
SOC 2 examination. An examination engagement to report on whether (a)
   the description of the service organization's system is in accordance with
   the description criteria, (b) the controls were suitably designed to provide
   reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commitments
   and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust ser-
   vices criteria, and (c) in a type 2 report, the controls operated effectively to
   provide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service com-
   mitments and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable
   trust services criteria. The SOC 2 examination is performed in accordance
   with the attestation standards and AICPA Guide SOC 2® Reporting on an
   Examination of Controls at a Service Organization Relevant to Security,
   Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, or Privacy.
SOC 3 engagement. An examination engagement to report on management's
   assertion about whether controls within the system were effective to pro-
   vide reasonable assurance that the service organization's service commit-
   ments and system requirements were achieved based on the trust services
   criteria relevant to one or more of the trust services categories (applicable
   trust services criteria).
subsequent events. Events or transactions that occur after the specified pe-
   riod covered by the engagement, but prior to the date of the service au-
   ditor's report, which could have a significant effect on the evaluation of
   the presentation of the description of the service organization's system or
   the evaluation of the suitability of design and operating effectiveness of
   controls.


©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP APP H
300   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  subservice organization. A vendor used by a service organization that per-
     forms controls that are necessary, in combination with controls at the ser-
     vice organization, to provide reasonable assurance that the service organi-
     zation's service commitments and system requirements were achieved.
  suitability of design (or suitably designed controls). Controls are suitably
      designed if they have the potential to provide reasonable assurance that
      the service organization's service commitments and system requirements
      would be achieved. Suitably designed controls are operated as designed by
      persons who have the necessary authority and competence to perform the
      controls.
  system. Refers to the infrastructure, software, procedures, and data that are
      designed, implemented, and operated by people to achieve one or more
      of the organization's specific business objectives (for example, delivery of
      services or production of goods) in accordance with management-specified
      requirements.
  system components. Refers to the individual elements of a system, which
      may be classified into the following five categories: infrastructure, software,
      people, procedures, and data.
  system event. An occurrence that could lead to the loss of, or disruption to,
      operations, services, or functions and result in a service organization's fail-
      ure to achieve its service commitments or system requirements. Such an
      occurrence may arise from actual or attempted unauthorized access or use
      by internal or external parties and (a) impair (or potentially impair) the
      availability, integrity, or confidentiality of information or systems; (b) re-
      sult in unauthorized disclosure or theft of information or other assets or
      the destruction or corruption of data; or (c) cause damage to systems. Such
      occurrences also may arise from the failure of the system to process data
      as designed or from the loss, corruption, or destruction of data used by the
      system.
  system incident. A system event that requires action on the part of service
      organization management to prevent or reduce the impact of the event
      on the service organization's achievement of its service commitments and
      system requirements.
  system requirements. Specifications about how the system should function
      to (a) meet the service organization's service commitments to user entities
      and others (such as user entities' customers); (b) meet the service organiza-
      tion's commitments to vendors and business partners; (c) comply with rele-
      vant laws and regulations and guidelines of industry groups, such as busi-
      ness or trade associations; and (d) achieve other objectives of the service
      organization that are relevant to the trust services categories addressed
      by the description. Requirements are often specified in the service orga-
      nization's system policies and procedures, system design documentation,
      contracts with customers, and government regulations.
  test of controls. A procedure designed to obtain evidence about whether con-
      trols operated effectively to achieve the service organization's service com-
      mitments and system requirements based on the applicable trust services
      criteria.
  third party. An individual or organization other than the service organiza-
      tion and its employees. Third parties may be customers, vendors, business
      partners, or others.

AAG-SOP APP H                                                      ©2022, AICPA
                                     Definitions                                     301
trust services. A set of professional attestation and advisory services based on
    a core set of criteria (trust services criteria) related to security, availability,
    processing integrity, confidentiality, or privacy.
unauthorized access. Access to information or system components that (a)
   has not been approved by a person designated to do so by management
   and (b) compromises segregation of duties, confidentiality commitments, or
   otherwise increases risks to the information or system components beyond
   the levels approved by management (that is, access is inappropriate).
user entity. An entity that uses the services provided by a service organization.
user or intended user. An individual or entity that the service auditor expects
   will use the service auditor's report.
vendor. An individual or business (and its employees) engaged to provide ser-
   vices to the service organization. Depending on the services a vendor pro-
   vides (for example, if it operates certain controls on behalf of the service
   organization that are necessary, in combination with the service organi-
   zation's controls, to provide reasonable assurance that the service organi-
   zation's service commitments and system requirements were achieved), a
   vendor might also be a subservice organization.




©2022, AICPA                                                          AAG-SOP APP H
               Overview of Statements on Quality Management Standards             303
Appendix I
  Overview of Statements on Quality
  Management Standards
  This appendix is nonauthoritative and is included for informational purposes
  only.
  Statement on Quality Management Standards (SQMS) No. 1, A Firm's System
  of Quality Management (QM section 10),1 was issued by the Auditing Standards
  Board of the AICPA in June 2022 and is effective for a firm's accounting and
  auditing practice as of December 15, 2025. This standard supersedes Statement
  on Quality Control Standards No. 8, A Firm's System of Quality Control (QM
  section 10A).
  The biggest change reflected in the new QM standard is the introduction of
  a risk-based approach in designing, implementing, and operating a system of
  quality management (SQM), which helps firms identify and address risks spe-
  cific to their practice and creates a more scalable approach to quality for all
  firms. The risk-based approach comprises (a) establishing quality objectives
  (the desired outcomes relating to the components of the SQM to be achieved
  by the firm); (b) identifying and assessing quality risks (a risk that has a rea-
  sonable possibility of occurring and, individually or in combination with other
  risks, adversely affecting the achievement of one or more quality objectives);
  and (c) designing and implementing responses (policies or procedures designed
  and implemented by the firm to address one or more quality risks).
  The standard's approach emphasizes the responsibility of firm leadership for
  proactively managing quality and provides flexibility to deal with differences
  in the size of firms and the nature of the services they provide. The essence
  of this approach is to focus firms' attention on risks that may have an impact
  on engagement quality. The approach requires a firm to customize the design,
  implementation, and operation of its SQM based on the nature and circum-
  stances of the firm and the engagements it performs. The standard also has an
  increased emphasis on a continual flow of remediation and improvement.
  An SQM addresses the following eight components, which are highly integrated
  and do not act in a linear manner:
           1. The firm's risk assessment process
           2. Governance and leadership
           3. Relevant ethical requirements
           4. Acceptance and continuance of client relationships and specific
              engagements
           5. Engagement performance
           6. Resources
           7. Information and communication
           8. The monitoring and remediation process


     1   All QM sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards.


  ©2022, AICPA                                                           AAG-SOP APP I
304   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  The objective of the firm is to design, implement, and operate an SQM for its
  accounting and auditing practice that provides the firm with reasonable assur-
  ance that
          a. the firm and its personnel fulfill their responsibilities in accordance
              with professional standards and applicable legal and regulatory
              requirements and conduct engagements in accordance with such
              standards and requirements, and
           b. engagement reports issued by the firm are appropriate in the
              circumstances.
  In this context, reasonable assurance is not intended to be obtained through
  independent assurance that the system is effective (for example, by having a
  peer review every year); instead, it is obtained through the operation of the
  system as a whole.


  Risk Assessment Process
  The purpose of the risk assessment process element of an SQM is to establish
  quality objectives, identify and assess quality risks, and design and implement
  responses to address the quality risks. The risk assessment process section of
  SQMS No. 1 focuses firms' attention on risks that may have an impact on en-
  gagement quality.
  The risk assessment is a three-step process:
          1. Establish quality objectives. The standard requires the firm to es-
             tablish specific quality objectives for each component except risk
             assessment and monitoring and remediation. The firm is required
             to establish additional quality objectives when necessary to achieve
             the objective of the SQM. However, the firm may not find it neces-
             sary to establish additional quality objectives.
          2. Identify and assess risks to the achievement of the quality objectives
             (referred to in the standard as quality risks). Identifying and as-
             sessing quality risks involves
                   a. understanding the factors (that is, the conditions, events,
                       circumstances, actions, or inactions) that may adversely
                       affect the achievement of the quality objectives and
                   b. taking into account how and the degree to which the fac-
                       tors may adversely affect the achievement of the quality
                       objectives. (The assessment of identified quality risks does
                       not require formal ratings or scores.)
                             i. A risk arises from how, and the degree to which, a
                                 condition, event, circumstance, action, or inaction
                                 may adversely affect the achievement of a qual-
                                 ity objective. Not all risks meet the definition of a
                                 quality risk.
          3. Design and implement responses to address the quality risks. The
             nature, timing, and extent of the firm's responses to address
             the quality risks are based on, and responsive to, the reasons
             for the assessments given to the quality risks. Certain responses
             are specified in the standard; however, the specific responses re-
             quired by the standard will not be sufficient for the firm to address
             all its quality risks.

AAG-SOP APP I                                                       ©2022, AICPA
           Overview of Statements on Quality Management Standards               305
Firms are also required to identify information indicating the need for additions
or modifications to quality objectives, quality risks, or responses.


Governance and Leadership
The purpose of the governance and leadership element of an SQM is to pro-
mote an internal culture based on the recognition that quality is essential
in performing engagements. The governance and leadership section of SQMS
No. 1 addresses the expected behavior of firm leadership in setting the tone at
the top, the appropriate qualifications of leadership, and holding leadership ac-
countable through performance evaluations. The standard also addresses the
importance of quality in the firm's strategic decisions and actions — includ-
ing financial and operational priorities — as well as firm leadership's ability to
influence decisions about the firm's resources.
The firm is required to assign ultimate responsibility and accountability for the
SQM to the firm's CEO, managing partner (or equivalent), or if appropriate,
managing board of partners (or equivalent). In addition, the firm is required to
assign the following to designated individuals:

        • Operational responsibility for the SQM
        • Operational responsibility for specific aspects of the SQM, includ-
          ing compliance with independence requirements and the monitor-
             ing and remediation process
SQMS No. 1 emphasizes the firm's commitment to quality through a cul-
ture that reflects the firm's role in serving the public interest through consis-
tent quality engagements. Leadership demonstrating a commitment to quality
through its actions and behaviors reinforces the responsibility that all person-
nel hold for quality relating to the performance of engagements and activities
within the SQM.


Relevant Ethical Requirements
The purpose of the relevant ethical requirements element of an SQM is to pro-
vide the firm with reasonable assurance that the firm and its personnel comply
with relevant ethical requirements when performing professional responsibil-
ities. The relevant ethical requirements component of SQMS No. 1 addresses
responsibilities regarding ethical requirements for the firm and its personnel
as well as others in the firm's network. The following quality objectives should
be established relating to the firm and its personnel:

        • Understand    the relevant ethical requirements to which the firm
          and the firm's engagements are subject.
        • Fulfill their responsibilities in relation to the relevant ethical re-
          quirements to which the firm and the firm's engagements are
             subject.
The firm should also ascertain that others (including the network, network
firms, individuals in the network or network firms, or service providers) who
are subject to the relevant ethical requirements to which the firm and the firm's
engagements are subject

        • understand
          and
                     the relevant ethical requirements that apply to them,


©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP APP I
306   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

          • fulfill their responsibilities in relation to the relevant ethical re-
            quirements that apply to them
  Examples of relationships between the relevant ethical requirements compo-
  nent and other components include the following:

          • The information and communication component may address the
            communication of various matters related to relevant ethical
               requirements, including

                   — the firm communicating the independence requirements
                     to all personnel and others subject to independence re-
                     quirements.
                   — personnel and engagement teams communicating rele-
                     vant information to the firm without fear of reprisals,
                     such as situations that may create threats to indepen-
                     dence or breaches of relevant ethical requirements.

          • As part of the resources component, the firm may
                   — assign individuals to manage and monitor compliance
                     with relevant ethical requirements or to provide con-
                     sultation on matters related to relevant ethical require-
                     ments.
                   — use IT applications to monitor compliance with relevant
                     ethical requirements, including recording and maintain-
                     ing information about independence.
  The relevant ethical requirements that apply to others depend on the provisions
  of the relevant ethical requirements and how the firm uses others in its SQM
  or in performing engagements. Examples follow:

          • Relevant ethical requirements may include requirements for in-
            dependence that apply to network firms or employees of network
               firms.
          •    The principle of confidentiality may apply to the firm's network,
               other network firms, or service providers when they have access
               to client information obtained by the firm.


  Acceptance and Continuance of Client Relationships and
  Speciﬁc Engagements
  The purpose of the acceptance and continuance of client relationships and spe-
  cific engagements component of an SQM is to provide reasonable assurance
  that the firm makes appropriate judgments about whether to accept or con-
  tinue a client relationship and whether to perform a specific engagement. A
  firm's acceptance and continuance policies represent a key element in quality
  management, while also mitigating litigation and business risk. This compo-
  nent of SQMS No. 1 also addresses quality objectives for firms around client
  acceptance and continuance decisions. These objectives include judgments by
  the firm to accept or continue a client relationship or specific engagement based
  on

          • information
            engagement.
                        obtained about the nature and circumstances of the


AAG-SOP APP I                                                     ©2022, AICPA
            Overview of Statements on Quality Management Standards           307
        • information   obtained about the integrity and ethical values of
          the client, including the identity and business reputation of the
             client's principal owners, key management, and those charged
             with its governance.
        •    the firm's ability to perform the engagement in accordance with
             professional standards. and applicable legal and regulatory re-
             quirements

SQMS No. 1 also emphasizes that the financial and operational priorities of
the firm should not lead to inappropriate judgments about whether to accept
or continue a client relationship or specific engagement.


Engagement Performance
The purpose of the engagement performance element of an SQM is to pro-
vide the firm with reasonable assurance that engagements are consistently
performed in accordance with applicable professional standards and regula-
tory and legal requirements and that the firm issues reports that are appro-
priate in the circumstances. The engagement performance section of SQMS
No. 1 provides quality objectives that firms should establish to obtain reason-
able assurance that high-quality performance is being attained in the firm's
engagements. Establishing and maintaining quality objectives such as the fol-
lowing help the firm in obtaining reasonable assurance relating to the engage-
ment performance element of an SQM:

        • Engagement   teams understand and fulfill their responsibilities
          in connection with the engagements, including, as applicable, the
             overall responsibility of engagement partners for managing and
             achieving quality on the engagement and being sufficiently and
             appropriately involved throughout the engagement.
        •    The nature, timing, and extent of direction and supervision of en-
             gagement teams and review of the work performed is appropri-
             ate based on the nature and circumstances of the engagements
             and the resources assigned or made available to the engagement
             teams; the work performed by less experienced engagement team
             members is directed, supervised, and reviewed by suitably expe-
             rienced engagement team members.
        •    Engagement teams exercise appropriate professional judgment
             and, when applicable to the type of engagement, maintain pro-
             fessional skepticism.
        •    Consultation on difficult or contentious matters is undertaken,
             and the conclusions agreed to are implemented.
        •    Differences of opinion within the engagement team, or between
             the engagement team and the engagement quality reviewer or in-
             dividuals performing activities within the firm's SQM, are brought
             to the attention of the firm and resolved.
        •    Engagement documentation is assembled on a timely basis af-
             ter the date of the engagement report and is appropriately main-
             tained and retained to meet the needs of the firm and comply with
             law, regulation, relevant ethical requirements, and professional
             standards.

©2022, AICPA                                                     AAG-SOP APP I
308   SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization

  Resources
  The purpose of the resources element of an SQM is to provide the firm with rea-
  sonable assurance that it is appropriately obtaining, developing, using, main-
  taining, allocating, and assigning resources in a timely manner to enable the
  design, implementation, and operation of the SQM. SQMS No. 1 addresses all
  resources that the firm needs both to operate the system and to perform en-
  gagements. These resources cover the following:

           • Technological   resources. For example, audit tools or IT applica-
             tions used by the firm for independence monitoring.
           • Intellectual resources. For example, the firm's methodology, guid-
             ance, templates, or tools.
           • Human    resources. This may include people outside the firm used
             in engagements, including component auditors or engagement
               quality reviewers who are external to the firm.
  The standard focuses on what resources are needed, how they are used and
  maintained, and whether they are appropriate. The principles-based nature
  of the requirements relating to resources takes into account the variety of re-
  sources used and their source. The resources section of SQMS No. 1 also covers
  the use of resources from service providers and how to determine that those
  resources are appropriate for the intended use by the firm. A resource from a
  service provider could be a methodology, an IT application, or people used in an
  engagement. Services that come from a firm's network, if the firm belongs to a
  network, are not considered as coming from a service provider.

  Information and Communication
  The purpose of the information and communication element of an SQM is to
  address the importance of communicating information obtained, generated, or
  used both within the firm and to external parties on a timely basis to enable
  the design, implementation, and operation of the SQM.
  This component of SQMS No. 1 underscores the importance of a continuous
  flow of information and communication by linking the exchange of information
  to the firm's culture so that it is driven from top leadership throughout the firm.
  The standard requires that the firm establish an information system with pro-
  cesses to identify, capture, process, and maintain information, acknowledging
  that less complex firms with fewer personnel and direct involvement of lead-
  ership may accomplish the objective with less rigorous or detailed policies and
  procedures.
  This component of SQMS No. 1 also encourages firms to be transparent to ex-
  ternal parties about their SQM in a relevant, innovative, and proactive manner.
  This component requires that firms establish policies and procedures that ad-
  dress when communications with external parties are appropriate. To promote
  continual innovation in this area, the standard provides flexibility regarding
  the specific information communicated, the form of that communication, and
  the nature, timing, and extent of communication.

  Monitoring and Remediation
  The purpose of the monitoring and remediation process element of an SQM is
  to provide the firm with relevant, reliable, and timely information about the

AAG-SOP APP I                                                      ©2022, AICPA
           Overview of Statements on Quality Management Standards              309
design, implementation, and operation of the SQM so the firm may take ap-
propriate action to remediate identified deficiencies on a timely basis. SQMS
No. 1 focuses on monitoring activities that address the entire SQM. The stan-
dard emphasizes performing tailored monitoring activities sufficient to provide
a basis for the firm to evaluate the SQM.
The requirements also emphasize factors that firms should consider in design-
ing monitoring activities, rather than prescribing such activities. The nature,
timing, and extent of monitoring activities will be driven by many firm-specific
factors including the following:
        • How the underlying system is designed
        • The  nature and circumstances of the firm and engagements it
          performs
        • The extent of changes to the system
        • The
          tions
               results of previous monitoring activities or external inspec-

This component includes a requirement to inspect completed engagements and
for engagement partners to be inspected on a cyclical basis. The firm determines
its inspection criteria, including how often to select completed engagements,
which completed engagements to select, which engagement partners to select,
and how frequently to select an engagement partner. In doing so, the firm takes
into account factors such as other types of monitoring the firm does, areas of
risk, and how the system is designed.
The standard includes requirements for evaluating findings, identifying defi-
ciencies, and evaluating the severity and persuasiveness of the deficiencies.
These include a requirement to investigate the root cause of identified defi-
ciencies. The requirement is intended to be flexible to encourage firms to scale
the nature, timing, and extent of the procedures to investigate the root cause
of the deficiencies so that they are appropriate and tailored to the circum-
stances. The evaluation of the severity and pervasiveness of deficiencies is also
used by leadership in evaluating the system and concluding whether it achieved
its objectives.




©2022, AICPA                                                       AAG-SOP APP I
